.. _3-1:

TRITON: A Multipurpose Transport, Depletion, And Sensitivity and Uncertainty Analysis Module
============================================================================================

*M. A. Jessee, D. Wiarda, K. T. Clarno, U. Mertyurek, K. Bekar*

ABSTRACT

The TRITON computer code is a multipurpose SCALE control module for
transport, depletion, and sensitivity and uncertainty analysis. TRITON
can be used to provide automated, problem-dependent cross section
processing followed by multigroup transport calculations for one-, two-,
and three-dimensional (1D, 2D, and 3D) configurations. Additionally,
this functionality can be used in tandem with the ORIGEN depletion
module to predict isotopic concentrations, source terms, and decay heat,
as well as to generate few-group homogenized cross sections for nodal
core calculations.

TRITON has been designed using the modular approach that is a hallmark
of SCALE functionality. TRITON provides the capability to perform
deterministic transport analysis for 1D geometries using XSDRNPM and for
2D geometries using NEWT. TRITON also includes 3D Monte Carlo depletion
capabilities using KENO V.a and KENO-VI. For Monte Carlo depletion
calculations, TRITON supports both multigroup and continuous-energy
options.

The TSUNAMI-2D sequence in TRITON provides calculation of 2D forward and
adjoint transport solutions in NEWT, calculation of sensitivity
coefficients, and calculation of the uncertainty in *k*\ :sub:`eff` and other
responses due to cross section covariance data. The SAMS module is used
to determine the sensitivity of the calculated value of responses to the
nuclear data used in the calculation as a function of nuclide, reaction
type, and energy. The uncertainty in the calculated value of the
response, resulting from uncertainties in the basic nuclear data used in
the calculation, is estimated using energy-dependent cross section
covariance matrices. The implicit effects of the cross section
processing calculations are also treated.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors express gratitude to B. T. Rearden for supervision of the
SCALE project and review of the manuscript. The authors acknowledge R.
Y. Lee and M. Aissa of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) for
their support of this project and Mark DeHart, as the original developer
of TRITON.


.. _3-1-1:

Introduction
------------

TRITON (Transport Rigor Implemented with Time-dependent Operation for
Neutronic depletion) is a multipurpose SCALE control module for
transport, depletion, and sensitivity and uncertainty analysis for
reactor physics applications. TRITON can be used to provide automated,
problem-dependent cross section processing followed by multigroup (MG)
neutron transport calculations for one-, two-, and three-dimensional
(1D, 2D, and 3D) configurations. Additionally, this functionality can be
used in tandem with the ORIGEN depletion module to predict isotopic
concentrations, source terms, and decay heat.

Most notable improvements to TRITON in this latest release are the
reduced run-time due to the integration of the XSProc module for cross
section processing coupled with improvements in the NEWT transport
module and the capability to perform continuous energy (CE) transport
calculations using Monte Carlo transport codes KENO-V.a and KENO-VI (MG
Monte Carlo depletion existed in previous versions).

TRITON has been designed using the modular approach that is a hallmark
of SCALE functionality. TRITON provides the capability to perform
deterministic transport analysis for 1D geometries using XSDRNPM and for
2D geometries using NEWT. TRITON also includes 3D Monte Carlo depletion
capabilities using KENO V.a and KENO-VI.

The sensitivity and uncertainty (S/U) analysis sequence in TRITON,
TSUNAMI-2D, provides calculation of the 2D forward and adjoint transport
solutions in NEWT; calculation of sensitivity coefficients; and
calculation of the uncertainty in *k*\ :sub:`eff` and other responses due to
cross section covariance data. The SAMS module is used to determine the
sensitivity of the calculated value of the response to the nuclear data
used in the calculation as a function of nuclide, reaction type, and
energy. The uncertainty in the calculated value of the response,
resulting from uncertainties in the basic nuclear data used in the
calculation, is estimated using energy-dependent cross section
covariance matrices. The implicit effects of the cross section
processing calculations are predicted using SENLIB and BONAMIST. The
energy-dependent sensitivity data computed with TSUNAMI-2D are stored in
a sensitivity data file (.sdf file) that is suitable for assessing
system similarity for code validation purposes using TSUNAMI-IP or for
data assimilation using TSURFER.

As a SCALE control module, TRITON automates execution of SCALE
functional modules and manages data transfer and input/output processes
for multiple analysis sequences. Each of TRITON’s nine calculational
sequences is provided in :numref:`tab3-1-1`, which lists the sequence name
keyword, the sequence description, and the function modules invoked
within each sequence. The method for cross section processing is
selected using a separate “\ *parm=*\ ” keyword, which is described in
more detail in the next section.'

.. _tab3-1-1:
.. table::
  :align: center

  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | **Sequence      | **Primary SCALE | **parm=         | **Sequence      |
  | keyword**       | modules**       | options**       | function**      |
  +=================+=================+=================+=================+
  | **Cross section |                 |                 |                 |
  | processing      |                 |                 |                 |
  | sequences**     |                 |                 |                 |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | ``=T-XSEC``     | XSProc          | bonami          | Preparation of  |
  |                 |                 |                 | multigroup (MG) |
  |                 |                 | centrm\ :sup:`a`| cross section   |
  |                 |                 |                 | library.        |
  |                 |                 | xslevel=1/2/3/4 |                 |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | **Transport     |                 |                 |                 |
  | sequences**     |                 |                 |                 |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | ``=T-XSDRN``    | XSProc, XSDRNPM | bonami          | 1D MG           |
  |                 |                 |                 | deterministic   |
  |                 |                 | centrm\ :sup:`a`| transport       |
  |                 |                 |                 | calculation.    |
  |                 |                 | xslevel=1/2/3/4 |                 |
  |                 |                 |                 |                 |
  |                 |                 | weight\ :sup:`b`|                 |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | ``=T-NEWT``     | XSProc, NEWT    |                 | 2D MG           |
  |                 |                 |                 | deterministic   |
  |                 |                 |                 | transport       |
  |                 |                 |                 | calculation.    |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | **Depletion     |                 |                 |                 |
  | sequences**     |                 |                 |                 |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | ``=T-DEPL-1D``  | XSProc,         | bonami          | 1D MG           |
  |                 | XSDRNPM,        |                 | deterministic   |
  |                 | ORIGEN, OPUS    | centrm          | transport,      |
  |                 |                 |                 | coupled with    |
  |                 |                 | xslevel=1/2/3\  | ORIGEN          |
  |                 |                 | *a*/4           | depletion.      |
  |                 |                 |                 |                 |
  |                 |                 | addnux=0/1/2\   |                 |
  |                 |                 | :sup:`a`/3/4    |                 |
  |                 |                 |                 |                 |
  |                 |                 | weight\ :sup:`b`|                 |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | ``=T-DEPL``     | XSProc, NEWT,   |                 | 2D MG           |
  |                 | ORIGEN, OPUS    |                 | deterministic   |
  |                 |                 |                 | transport,      |
  |                 |                 |                 | coupled with    |
  |                 |                 |                 | ORIGEN          |
  |                 |                 |                 | depletion.      |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | ``=T5-DEPL``    | XSProc\ :sup:`c`|                 | 3D, Monte Carlo |
  |                 | KENO-V.a,       |                 | transport       |
  |                 | ORIGEN, OPUS    |                 | (KENO-V.a),     |
  |                 |                 |                 | coupled with    |
  |                 |                 |                 | ORIGEN          |
  |                 |                 |                 | depletion.      |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | ``=T6-DEPL``    | XSProc\ *c*,    |                 | 3D, Monte Carlo |
  |                 | KENOVI, ORIGEN, |                 | transport       |
  |                 | OPUS            |                 | (KENO-VI),      |
  |                 |                 |                 | coupled with    |
  |                 |                 |                 | ORIGEN          |
  |                 |                 |                 | depletion.      |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | **Sensitivity   |                 |                 |                 |
  | and Uncertainty |                 |                 |                 |
  | Analysis        |                 |                 |                 |
  | sequences**     |                 |                 |                 |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | ``=TSUNAMI-2D`` | XSProc, NEWT,   | bonamist        | 2D forward and  |
  |                 | SAMS, BONAMIST  |                 | adjoint         |
  | ``=TSUNAMI-2DC``|                 | bonami          | transport       |
  |                 |                 |                 | calculations,   |
  |                 |                 | centrm\ *a*     | followed by S/U |
  |                 |                 |                 | analysis with   |
  |                 |                 |                 | SAMS            |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`a`\ Defau\|                 |                 |                 |
  | lt parm value.  |                 |                 |                 |
  | Note that       |                 |                 |                 |
  | centrm is       |                 |                 |                 |
  | equivalent to   |                 |                 |                 |
  | xslevel=4. See  |                 |                 |                 |
  | :ref:`3-1-3-7-2`|                 |                 |                 |
  | for details.    |                 |                 |                 |
  |                 |                 |                 |                 |
  |    :sup:`b`\ pa\|                 |                 |                 |
  |    rm=weight    |                 |                 |                 |
  |    is used to   |                 |                 |                 |
  |    generate a   |                 |                 |                 |
  |    broad group  |                 |                 |                 |
  |    cross        |                 |                 |                 |
  |    section      |                 |                 |                 |
  |    library.     |                 |                 |                 |
  |    This parm    |                 |                 |                 |
  |    option is    |                 |                 |                 |
  |    only         |                 |                 |                 |
  |    available    |                 |                 |                 |
  |    for the      |                 |                 |                 |
  |    T-DEPL       |                 |                 |                 |
  |    sequence.    |                 |                 |                 |
  |                 |                 |                 |                 |
  |    *c*\ T5-DEPL |                 |                 |                 |
  |    and T6-DEPL  |                 |                 |                 |
  |    is also      |                 |                 |                 |
  |    available in |                 |                 |                 |
  |    CE-mode,     |                 |                 |                 |
  |    which does   |                 |                 |                 |
  |    not invoke   |                 |                 |                 |
  |    XSProc for   |                 |                 |                 |
  |    cross        |                 |                 |                 |
  |    section      |                 |                 |                 |
  |    processing.  |                 |                 |                 |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+

.. _3-1-2:

Overview of TRITON Sequences
----------------------------

The TRITON control module supports nine calculational sequences, each
with its own design and applications. Each of these sequences is
described in the following subsections.

The first subsection covers the basic cross section processing sequence
T-XSEC. The T-XSEC sequence prepares problem-dependent multigroup cross
sections for subsequent transport analysis. The second subsection covers
TRITON’s transport analysis sequences, while the third subsection
discusses TRITON’s depletion analysis sequences. The final subsection is
dedicated to the TSUNAMI-2D sensitivity and uncertainty analysis
sequences in TRITON.

.. _3-1-2-1:

Cross section processing sequence (T-XSEC)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The T-XSEC sequence provides the ability to prepare a problem-dependent
multigroup cross section library using SCALE cross section processing
modules to appropriately account for spatial and energy self-shielding
effects. The problem-dependent cross section library contains
microscopic cross sections for each nuclide for each material
composition defined in the TRITON input. SCALE provides several unit
cell types (e.g., a lattice of pins, an infinite medium, a multiregion
problem, or a doubly heterogeneous cell) to correct the cross sections
for spatial and energy self-shielding. Multiple cell calculations can be
used in the same calculation. The calculation of multigroup cross
sections is executed by XSProc (:ref:`7-1`).

.. _3-1-2-2:

Transport sequences (T-XSDRN, T-NEWT)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The TRITON transport sequences build upon the cross section processing
sequence by automating a transport calculation after cross section
processing. Both 1D and 2D discrete-ordinates transport calculations can
be performed using XSDRNPM and NEWT, respectively. The T-XSDRN sequence
calls XSDRNPM for transport analysis in slab, sphere, or cylindrical
geometries, while the T-NEWT sequence calls NEWT for analyses in 2D
*xy-*\ geometries. In addition to the input necessary for cross section
processing, an XSDRN or NEWT input model is also required. The XSDRN
model input is discussed in Appendix A of TRITON; the NEWT model input
requirements are described in the NEWT chapter. Similar capabilities and
applications for KENO-V.a and KENO-VI are handled through the CSAS5 and
CSAS6 sequences, respectively.

.. _3-1-2-3:

Depletion sequences (T-DEPL, T-DEPL-1D, T5-DEPL, T6-DEPL)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The TRITON depletion sequences build upon the transport sequences by
automating depletion/decay calculations after the transport calculations
for each material designated for depletion. One or more materials in the
model can be designated for depletion. Each designated material is
depleted using region-averaged reaction rates, accounting for all
regions in the model associated with a given depletion material. The
TRITON depletion calculation procedure is described further in the next
subsection. TRITON automates the various computational processes—cross
section processing, transport, and depletion—over a series of depletion
and decay intervals supplied by the user. The depletion procedure is
discussed in :ref:`3-1-2-3-1`. The 2D TRITON depletion sequence (T-DEPL),
which uses NEWT for the transport calculations, also provides the
capability to generate lattice-physics data for nodal core calculations.
These lattice physics capabilities are discussed in :ref:`3-1-2-3-2`.

Within TRITON depletion calculations, TRITON invokes the ORIGEN
depletion module for the time-dependent transmutation of each
user-defined material. TRITON provides ORIGEN the neutron flux
space-energy distribution, the multigroup cross sections, material
concentrations, and material volumes. ORIGEN performs the flux
normalization, cross section collapse, and multi-material
depletion/decay operations to determine new isotopic concentrations for
the next calculation.

.. _3-1-2-3-1:

Predictor-corrector depletion process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For all depletion sequences, TRITON automates cross section processing,
transport, and depletion calculations over a series of depletion-decay
intervals supplied by the user. A **depletion interval** represents a
time interval in which the model power level is assumed constant. A
depletion model that exhibits various power level changes will require
multiple depletion intervals to accurately model the changes in power.
Each depletion interval can be followed by a decay calculation over a
user-specified **decay interval**.

Within a given depletion interval (e.g., an LWR operating at constant
power for a 12-month fuel cycle), the isotope concentrations of
different depletion materials change, which induces changes in the
problem-dependent multigroup cross sections (through spatial and energy
self-shielding effects) as well as the neutron flux distribution,
leading to different power distributions and transmutation rates in
depletion materials. This requires TRITON to represent each depletion
interval as a series of smaller time intervals in which cross section
processing and transport solutions are recomputed to accurately model
these time-dependent effects. A **depletion subinterval** represents a
time interval in which TRITON performs cross section processing and
transport calculations to determine cross sections and flux
distributions used in the depletion calculations. All depletion
subintervals for a given depletion interval have the same length—for
example, one 12-month depletion interval can be represented as a series
of 12 one-month depletion subintervals, or as 6 two-month depletion
subintervals. Alternatively, the 12-month depletion interval can be
modeled as two consecutive 6-month depletion intervals, each one having
a different number of subintervals. Therefore the formulation of a
**depletion scheme** in TRITON is highly flexible. A depletion scheme is
the set of user-defined depletion and decay intervals with associated
power levels and number of subintervals. *TRITON does not provide
automated means to determine the appropriate depletion scheme for a
given application. The user must determine the accurate depletion scheme
specific to his or her application.*

TRITON uses a predictor-corrector approach to process the user-defined
depletion scheme. The predictor-corrector approach performs cross
section processing and transport calculations based on anticipated
isotope concentrations at the *midpoint* of a depletion subinterval.
Depletion calculations are then performed over the full subinterval
using cross sections and flux distributions predicted at the midpoint.
Depletion calculations are then extended to the midpoint of the next
subinterval (possibly through a decay interval and into a new depletion
interval), followed by cross section processing and transport
calculations at the new midpoint. The iterative process is repeated
until all depletion subintervals are processed. In order to start the
calculation, a “bootstrap case” is required using initial isotope
concentrations for the initial cross section processing and transport
calculation. The bootstrap calculation is used to determine the
anticipated isotope concentrations at the midpoint of the first
depletion subinterval.

The predictor-corrector approach is best explained by an example.
:numref:`fig3-1-1` illustrates the predictor-corrector process for a
hypothetical depletion scheme with two depletion intervals. The first
depletion interval contains two subintervals, followed by a decay
interval. The second depletion interval contains one subinterval and is
also followed by a decay interval. In :numref:`fig3-1-1`, cross section
processing and transport calculations are represented by the “T” label,
and depletion calculations are represented by the “D" label. For this
example, four sets of calculations would be necessary: one for each of
the three depletion subintervals, and one for the initial “bootstrap
case.” These calculations are represented in the following eight steps.

Step 1 T\ :sub:`0`: Cross section processing and transport calculation
using initial (i.e., time-zero) isotope concentrations.

Step 2 D\ :sub:`1`: Depletion calculation from time-zero to the midpoint
of the first depletion subinterval. The dashed horizontal arrow denotes
a “predictor” depletion step.

Step 3 T\ :sub:`1`: Cross section processing and transport calculation
at the midpoint of the first depletion subinterval.

Step 4 D\ :sub:`1`: Depletion calculation for the first depletion
subinterval. The solid horizontal arrow across the subinterval denotes a
“corrector” depletion step. *Corrector steps use cross sections and flux
distribution computed at the subinterval midpoint.* This is represented
by a solid arrow from T\ :sub:`1` to D\ :sub:`1`.

  D\ :sub:`2`: Predictor depletion calculation for the second depletion
  subinterval. *Predictor steps use cross sections and flux distribution
  computed at the*\ **previous**\ *subinterval midpoint.* This is
  represented as the dashed arrow from T\ :sub:`1` to D\ :sub:`2`.

Step 5 T\ :sub:`2`: Cross section processing and transport calculation
at the midpoint of the second depletion subinterval.

Step 6 D\ :sub:`2`: Corrector depletion calculation for the second
depletion subinterval, followed by the decay calculation at the end of
the first depletion interval.

  D\ :sub:`3`: Predictor depletion calculation for the third depletion
  subinterval. The third depletion subinterval is the first and only
  subinterval associated with the second depletion interval.

Step 7 T\ :sub:`3`: Cross section processing and transport calculation
at the midpoint of the third depletion subinterval.

Step 8 D\ :sub:`3`: Corrector depletion calculation for the third
depletion subinterval. This calculation is followed by a second decay
calculation.

.. _fig3-1-1:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig1.png
  :align: center
  :width: 500

  Predictor/corrector depletion algorithm used by TRITON.

The depletion calculations are performed by ORIGEN and span either the
first half of a subinterval (predictor step) or the full subinterval
(corrector step). ORIGEN performs these depletion calculations and
possible decay calculations over a series of smaller time intervals. The
**ORIGEN time intervals** are automatically determined by TRITON
depending on the length of the depletion subinterval and decay interval.
Additionally, TRITON will automatically adjust the number of
subintervals per depletion interval if the time length of the
user-defined subinterval is large (i.e., >400 days). TRITON writes the
utilized depletion scheme near the top of the output file. The depletion
scheme output edit is further described in :ref:`3-1-5-4-1`.

.. _3-1-2-3-2:

Lattice physics analysis
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The 2D depletion sequence (T-DEPL) may be used to generate lattice
physics data for subsequent core analysis calculations using core
simulator software. Core simulators typically employ few-group nodal
diffusion theory for neutronic calculations, coupled with other
calculation methods for thermal hydraulics, fuel performance, and plant
operation (e.g., soluble boron letdown or control rod movement). Core
simulation requires the use of pretabulated **lattice physics data** for
the neutronic calculations—that is, few-group homogenized cross
sections, with appropriate discontinuity factors, pin powers, and
kinetic parameters, functionalized in terms of burnup and other system
conditions such as fuel temperature and moderator density.

To support lattice physics database preparation, the NEWT transport
module contains flexible input options to define the few-group energy
structure, spatial homogenization regions, and discontinuity factors.
After the transport calculation at the midpoint of each depletion
subinterval, NEWT computes the lattice physics data and stores this data
on a temporary file. TRITON reads the temporary file and archives the
lattice physics data onto a separate database file. In addition, the
*T-DEPL* sequence supports branch calculations in which perturbations
may be applied to certain system conditions such as fuel temperatures
and moderator density. TRITON automates the cross section processing and
transport calculations for each branch condition at the midpoint of the
depletion subinterval. NEWT computes the lattice physics data for the
branch calculations, and TRITON archives this data onto the lattice
physics database file.

The TRITON input options for branch calculations are described in :ref:`3-1-3-3-2`,
and the file format of the lattice physics database is
provided in the Appendix B of TRITON.

.. note:: The TRITON input options for
  branch calculations are designed to be highly flexible to support a
  large range of core analyses; therefore, TRITON does not provide
  automated means to determine the branch calculations. The user must
  determine the necessary branch calculations for his or her core analysis
  and be knowledgeable of the capabilities and limitations of the cross
  section treatment of the core simulator. The TRITON Lattice Physics
  Primer has been developed to provide guidance on appropriate TRITON
  branch calculations for LWR core analysis (NUREG/CR-7041) and in “Cross
  Section Generation Guidelines for TRACE-PARCS” (NUREG/CR-7164).

.. _3-1-2-4:

S/U analysis sequences (TSUNAMI-2D, TSUNAMI-2DC)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

TRITON supports a 2D sequence (TSUNAMI-2D) to support cross section
sensitivity and uncertainty (S/U) analysis. The TSUNAMI-2D sequence is
similar in function to the 2D transport sequence T-NEWT, except that
TRITON sets up additional calculations to perform S/U analysis. After
the initial transport calculation, a second transport calculation is
performed to compute the adjoint flux solution. Both the forward and
adjoint fluxes are saved to different files that are read by the SAMS
module to compute sensitivity coefficients and the uncertainty in
*k*\ :sub:`eff`. In addition to S/U analysis for *k*\ :sub:`eff`, the TSUNAMI-2D
sequence allows for S/U analysis of user-defined ratios of forward flux
responses, such as flux-weighted cross sections, reaction rate ratios,
and power-peaking factors. For each user-defined response ratio, TRITON
automates additional fixed-source adjoint transport calculations in
NEWT, followed by S/U calculations in SAMS. TRITON iteratively calls
NEWT and SAMS for each response ratio definition. TRITON also
automatically sets up the fixed-source input for NEWT, which is
implicitly defined by the response ratio specification.

For TSUNAMI-2D calculations, the TRITON input is similar to 2D transport
calculations (T-NEWT) with some additional input options. Input data
blocks are available to define response ratios for S/U analysis.
Additional input data blocks are available for the SAMS module to
control various aspects of the sensitivity and uncertainty calculations
and output formatting. The S/U input options are further discussed in
the TSUNAMI-1D manual. Examples of TSUNAMI-2D models are provided in
:ref:`3-1-6`.

Although TSUNAMI-2D is similar to the T-NEWT sequence, enhanced versions
of the cross section processing codes are used to compute sensitivity
data necessary for the SAMS calculation. In place of the BONAMI code
used by T-NEWT, TSUNAMI-2D utilizes a sensitivity version called
BONAMIST. This enhanced code computes the problem-dependent multigroup
cross sections along with their sensitivities to the input data, the
so-called “implicit sensitivities.” Implicit sensitivity effects from
ENDF/B-VII cross sections are now treated with full-range Bondarenko
factors present on the multigroup library with BONAMIST.

The NEWT-based TSUNAMI-2D sequence is functionally similar to the
TSUNAMI-1D and TSUNAMI-3D_K5/TSUNAMI-3D_K6 sequences of SCALE, in which
cross section processing, forward and adjoint transport calculations,
and S/U calculations are automated using XSDRN and KENO V.a/KENO-VI,
respectively. Like these S/U sequences, TRITON supports an auxiliary
sequence, TSUNAMI-2DC\ *,* which does not perform the additional adjoint
transport calculations and SAMS calculations. The TSUNAMI-2DC sequence
does not employ the sensitivity version of the cross section processing
code, BONAMIST, as the sensitivity data from this code is not used in
the calculation sequence. The TSUNAMI-2DC sequence is identical to the
T-NEWT sequence with one exception: if user-defined response ratios are
provided in the input, then TSUNAMI-2DC will compute the response ratios
and edit their values in the output file.

.. note:: During the development of SCALE 6.2, the cross section processing
  routines were significantly modernized to use XSProc for all of the
  TRITON sequence except TSUNAMI-2D; therefore, the run times will be
  slower for each T-NEWT calculation and the solution will be somewhat
  different. However, the other TSUNAMI sequences do use XSProc.

.. _3-1-3:

Input Description
-----------------

TRITON input is free-form and keyword based, similar in form to many
other modules in SCALE. With a few exceptions, the following formatting
rules apply:

-  Data is limited to 255 columns but may wrap into as many lines as are
   needed.

-  Comment lines start with a tick mark (') in the first column of a
   line and may be placed anywhere in the input.

-  The keyword-based input is case insensitive.

-  TRITON input is organized into blocks of data. Each data block begins
   with *read blockname* and terminates with *end blockname*.

-  Blocks of data may appear in any order. Each block of data may appear
   only once in the input.

-  Input can be redirected from an auxiliary file by using the open
   angle bracket (<) and the name of the file—for example,
   *</path/to/auxiliary_input_file*.

The first three lines of input and the last line of the input are
unique. The first line of input contains the TRITON sequence name along
with parameter specifications, e.g., *parm=centrm*. The second line
contains the case title (up to 80 characters), and the third line
contains the cross section library identifier. The last line of the
input contains the end keyword and terminates the input file. An example
TRITON input is as follows:

.. highlight:: scale

::

  =t-xsec         parm=(centrm,check)
  TRITON Input Example
  V7-252
  ...
  end

In this example, the first line of input declares this calculation to
use the T-XSEC sequence. The name of the sequence is preceded by the “=”
sign. After the sequence name, two parameter options are specified.
Parameters are optional. If specified, the keyword *parm=* must precede
the parameter options. Multiple parameter options can be provided in a
comma-separated list enclosed in parentheses. In this example, the
*centrm* option specifies the CENTRM-based discrete-ordinates sequence
is used by default. The *check* option implies that TRITON will read all
input and ensure that no input errors are present, without running
additional calculations. The second input line provides the case title:
*TRITON Input Example*. The third input line provides the cross section
library: *V7-252*. This example input file is terminated at the *end*
keyword. The *end* keyword must appear by itself at the beginning of the
final line of the input file.

The TRITON input section is organized by sequences. The first section
summarizes the input requirements for the cross section processing
sequence T-XSEC, which includes discussion of the *COMPOSITION* and
*CELLDATA* block. The second section summarizes the input requirements
for the TRITON transport sequences T-XSDRN and T-NEWT. The *XSDRN MODEL*
block is described in Appendix B of TRITON. The third section summarizes
the input for TRITON depletion sequences: T‑DEPL-1D, T-DEPL, T5-DEPL,
and T6-DEPL. The depletion sequence input section includes discussion of
the *DEPLETION, BURNDATA, TIMETABLE, BRANCH,* and *OPUS* blocks. The
fourth section summarizes the input requirements for the TRITON S/U
sequences TSUNAMI-2D and TSUNAMI-2DC.

The input requirements for the depletion sequences and the S/U sequences
build upon the input requirements for the cross section processing
sequence and the transport sequences, so the user should be familiar
with these first two sections. However, the input requirements for the
depletion and S/U sequences are independent, so the user can skip over
these sections as needed.

The fifth and sixth section of the input description is dedicated to two
TRITON-specific blocks of data to simplify model development and output
control: the *ALIAS* block and the *KEEP_OUTPUT* block, respectively.
The final section describes TRITON control parameters used in the
*parm=* specification.

.. _3-1-3-1:

Cross section processing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

An example input structure for a cross section processing sequence
calculation is provided in :numref:`fig3-1-2`.

.. _fig3-1-2:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig2.svg
  :align: center
  :width: 500

  Structure of T-XSEC input.

In this input, the title can be any descriptive title, and the cross
section library *x-sect_lib_name* can be any multigroup SCALE cross
section library (or continuous-energy library if KENO is used). The
three blocks of data highlighted in red—\ *ALIAS, COMPOSITION,* and
*CELLDATA*—**must** appear in the order shown above. However, the
*ALIAS* and *CELLDATA* blocks are optional. If the *ALIAS* block is not
used, the *COMPOSITION* block follows the cross section library line. If
the *CELLDATA* block is not used, the input is terminated after the
*COMPOSITION* block.

The input requirements for the *ALIAS* block are deferred to :ref:`3-1-3-5`
as the *ALIAS* block impacts many different blocks of data for
all TRITON sequences. The *COMPOSITION* block is used to define material
compositions and temperatures. The *CELLDATA* block is used to specify
unit cell calculations used to generate problem-dependent multigroup
cross sections. The input requirements for the *COMPOSITION* and
*CELLDATA* blocks are comprehensively described in the XSProc manual and
are not repeated here. :numref:`fig3-1-3` shows an example input for a cross
section processing calculation. In this input file, cross section
processing calculations are performed for two different square-pitched
UO\ :sub:`2` fuel pins surrounded by Zircaloy-4 cladding and borated
H\ :sub:`2`\ O moderator. The first fuel pin (material 1) is 2.5%
enriched in :sup:`235`\ U. The second fuel pin (material 4) is 4.5%
enriched in :sup:`235`\ U. These materials are used in two separate unit
cell definitions in the *CELLDATA* block.

.. _fig3-1-3:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig3.svg
  :align: center
  :width: 500

  Example T-XSEC input.

One key observation in this example is the duplicate definitions for the
clad material (materials 2 and 5) and the moderator material (materials
3 and 6). For practical use in subsequent transport calculations, only
four material compositions need to be defined: one each for the
different fuel pin enrichments and one definition each for the clad and
moderator material compositions. However, as described in the XSProc
manual, the same material identifier cannot be used in multiple unit
cell definitions. Because this example requires two separate unit cell
definitions to appropriately generate cross sections for each fuel pin
enrichment, duplicate definitions are required for the clad and
moderator compositions. The unique mixture number input requirement can
lead to many duplicate definitions of clad and moderator materials,
depending on model complexity. To simplify model development, duplicate
material compositions and similar unit cell definitions can be defined
simultaneously through the use of aliases. The *ALIAS* block is
discussed further in :ref:`3-1-3-5`.

.. _3-1-3-1-1:

Combined two-region and S\ :sub:`N` cross section processing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It is possible to use the both the CENTRM-based two-region method and
the CENTRM-based S\ :sub:`N` method within the same input file.
:numref:`fig3-1-4` shows a modified input file of the previous example in
which the first unit cell uses S\ :sub:`N` cross section processing and
the second unit cell uses two-region cross section processing. Each unit
cell contains a *centrmdata* keyword specification after the
*latticecell* specification. The *centrmdata* specification contains a
set of additional keyword specifications used to identify the
S\ :sub:`N` and the two-region options in CENTRM.

The input centrmdata npxs=1 end centrmdata instructs TRITON to use
S\ :sub:`N` cross section processing, whereas the input centrmdata
npxs=5 end centrmdata instructs TRITON to use two-region cross section
processing. These keyword options are described in detail in the XSProc
manual. The default cross section option for TRITON is S\ :sub:`N`;
therefore, the first *centrmdata* specification is not needed (but still
acceptable). If *parm=centrm* was specified, the first *centrmdata*
specification would not be needed (but still acceptable), whereas the
second *centrmdata* specification would be required to activate the
two-region option. Conversely, if *parm=2region* was specified, the
second *centrmdata* specification is not needed (but still acceptable),
whereas the first *centrmdata* specification would be required to
activate the S\ :sub:`N` option.

The *centrmdata* specifications may also be applied to other unit cell
types (e.g., multiregion); however, the two-region method is only valid
for specific unit cell configurations described in the XSProc manual.
The user should determine the applicability of the two-region method by
comparing calculation results with continuous-energy calculations or
multigroup calculations using the CENTRM-based S\ :sub:`N` method.

.. _fig3-1-4:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig4.svg
  :align: center
  :width: 500

  T-XSEC input with multiple cross section processing options.

.. _3-1-3-1-2:

User-defined Dancoff factors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Like other SCALE calculations, TRITON uses Dancoff factors as part of
its cross section processing calculations. The user can specify Dancoff
factors for various materials by using the *centrmdata* specification
and the *dan2pitch* keyword. Here is an example.

::

  read celldata
     latticecell squarepitch fueld=0.95 1 cladd=1.05 2 pitch=1.4 3 end
     centrmdata dan2pitch=0.51 end centrmdata
     latticecell squarepitch fueld=0.95 4 cladd=1.05 5 pitch=1.4 6 end
     centrmdata dan2pitch=0.65 end centrmdata
  end celldata

In this example, fuel materials 1 and 4 were assigned a Dancoff factor
of 0.51 and 0.65, respectively. These Dancoff factor values can be
computed using the SCALE MCDANCOFF sequence. Only one *dan2pitch*
keyword is allowed for a given *centrmdata* specification.

.. _3-1-3-2:

Transport sequences
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

An example input structure for a transport sequence calculation is
provided in :numref:`fig3-1-5`.

.. _fig3-1-5:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig5.svg
  :align: center
  :width: 500

  Structure of T-NEWT or T-XSDRN input.

The *MODEL* block contains a full transport model input description and
is required for both the T‑NEWT and T-XSDRN sequences. *The MODEL block
must be the last block of data in the input file.* The *MODEL* block
provides the physical layout of the configuration for which the
transport calculation is to be performed, along with general control
parameters. The nature of data embedded within the MODEL block depends
on the sequence selected. For the T-NEWT sequence, the *MODEL* block
contains a complete NEWT input listing. NEWT input is fully described in
the NEWT chapter and is not repeated here. For the T-XSDRN sequence, the
*MODEL* block is described in the Appendix B of TRITON. Sample problems
for both the T-NEWT and T-XSDRN sequences are provided in :ref:`3-1-6`.
The optional *KEEP_OUTPUT* block is described in :ref:`3-1-3-6`.

.. _3-1-3-3:

Depletion sequences input
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

An example input structure for a depletion calculation is provided in
:numref:`fig3-1-6`.

.. _fig3-1-6:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig6.svg
  :align: center
  :width: 500

  Structure of depletion sequence input.

The TRITON depletion sequences support the blocks of data highlighted in
red: the *DEPLETION,* *BURNDATA, OPUS, BRANCH, and TIMETABLE* data
blocks. These data blocks, along with the *KEEP_OUTPUT* block, may
appear only once, in any order, and must follow the *COMPOSITION* and
*CELLDATA* blocks and must precede the *MODEL* block. The *DEPLETION*
and *BURNDATA* blocks are always required for depletion calculations.

The *MODEL* block contains a full transport model input description and
is required for all depletion sequences. For the *T-DEPL* sequence, the
*MODEL* block contains a complete NEWT input listing. NEWT input is
fully described in NEWT chapter and is not repeated here. For the
*T-DEPL-1D* sequence, the *MODEL* block is described in Appendix A of
TRITON. For *T5-DEPL* and *T6-DEPL* sequences, the *MODEL* block
contains input for KENO V.a and KENO-VI, respectively. The details of
KENO V.a and KENO-VI input formats are described in the KENO V.a and
KENO-VI chapters and are not repeated here.

TRITON reads the *MODEL* block at the beginning of the sequence to
process the input and save data to appropriate data in memory (or on a
restart file for KENO). Reading the *MODEL* block at the beginning of
the sequence allows TRITON to check all transport module data and to
terminate immediately if errors are found in the model input. When the
transport module is eventually invoked by the sequence, TRITON uses the
processed data in memory (or reads it from the restart file), allowing
for transport iterations (XSDRN, NEWT) or neutron histories (KENO) to
begin immediately, eliminating the need for recalculation of geometry
data each time the transport module is invoked.

.. _3-1-3-3-1:

BURNDATA block
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The *BURNDATA* data block allows specification of the **depletion
scheme** for the model and is used only by the four depletion sequences
in TRITON. As described in :ref:`3-1-2-3-1`, the depletion scheme
consists of a series of **depletion intervals**—time intervals of
constant power operation—which may be partitioned into many **depletion
subintervals**—intervals over which cross section processing and
transport calculations are performed to update cross sections and flux
distributions used in the depletion calculation. Moreover, depletion
intervals may be optionally followed by a **decay interval**—a time
interval for zero-power decay.

The depletion intervals that define the depletion scheme are specified
in the *BURNDATA* block in chronological order within the *BURNDATA*
block, with the following format.

::

  READ burndata
  power=P burn=B down=D nlib=N end
  power=P burn=B down=D nlib=N end
  END burndata

where

  *P* = average specific power in the basis material(s), in megawatts per
  metric tonne of initial heavy metal (MW/MTHM) (typically MW/MTU for
  uranium-only models);

  *B* = length of depletion interval in days;

  *D* = length of decay interval in days following the depletion interval
  (optional, default = 0.0);

  *N* = number of depletion subintervals for the depletion interval
  (optional, default = 1).

The average specific power is provided for the basis material(s). In
other words, localized power distributions are uniformly scaled
accordingly in the transport solution such that the average power in the
basis material(s) matches the power specified in input. By default, the
basis consists of all materials in the model, so that local powers are
scaled to obtain a problem-wide average power matching the power
specified in input. The basis can be set as a single material or set of
materials in the *DEPLETION* data block. The *DEPLETION* data block is
described in :ref:`3-1-3-3-4`.

Each depletion interval specification must be terminated by an end
keyword. As many depletion intervals as necessary may be entered to
model the depletion scheme. At least one depletion interval must always
be entered; hence, the *BURNDATA* block is always required in depletion
calculations. The number of depletion subintervals can be used to refine
the temporal discretization to force more cross section processing and
transport calculations per depletion interval, as discussed in :ref:`3-1-2-3-1`.

An example of a *BURNDATA* block is shown in :numref:`fig3-1-7`. The example
case in :numref:`fig3-1-7` contains three depletion intervals, with the first
interval at power 26.54 MW/MTHM in the basis materials (the basis is
defined in the *DEPLETION* block), for an interval of 121 days. This is
followed by a second depletion interval at power 38.01 MW/MTHM for 201.5
days and then 30 days of zero-power operation. In the third depletion
interval, the basis materials are depleted at a 31.44 MW/MTHM power
level for 386.25 days, followed by 5 years (1826.25 days) of decay. In
this model, three, two, and one depletion subintervals are used for the
first, second, and third depletion intervals, respectively.

.. _fig3-1-7:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig7.svg
  :align: center
  :width: 400

  Example *BURNDATA* block input.

.. _3-1-3-3-2:

BRANCH block
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The T-DEPL sequence in TRITON supports the ability to perform branch
calculations during depletion calculations. Branch calculations are not
supported for the 3D depletion sequences, nor are branch calculations
supported for problems that require doubly heterogeneous cross section
processing. A branch calculation is a recalculation of cross section
processing and transport calculations with one or more of a limited set
of input parameters modified. These calculations are performed at the
same location in the depletion scheme as in the nominal cross section
processing and transport calculations—that is, at t = 0 and at the
midpoint of the depletion subintervals (see :ref:`3-1-2-3-1` for more
details on the TRITON predictor-corrector depletion scheme). Branch
calculations allow for the quantification of changes in system responses
of interest (eigenvalue, pin powers, homogenized few-group cross
sections, and kinetic parameters) due to changes in system parameters.
TRITON saves the responses of interest for the nominal and each
perturbed (branch) state, for each evaluation within the TRITON
depletion scheme. These responses of interest—in particular, homogenized
cross sections—may be subsequently extracted for use in nodal core
simulation calculations.

Branch calculations represent a branch from the primary depletion scheme
at each depletion subinterval. With branching enabled, selected
properties or conditions (fuel temperature, moderator temperature,
moderator density, soluble boron concentration, and control rod
insertion, or any combination thereof) can be varied from the reference
state for as many branches as are desired. Depletion calculations,
however, are performed for reference-state conditions only. :numref:`fig3-1-8`
illustrates the branch loop during a T-DEPL sequence calculation.
Although not technically a branch state, the reference state is
considered to be branch 0 for numbering purposes within TRITON. For each
branch calculation >0, TRITON updates the appropriate parameters and
re-executes the cross section processing and transport calculations.
Responses of interest are saved to a database file (i.e., the txtfile16
file) for both the nominal and perturbed-state conditions, and TRITON
reverts to cross sections and fluxes from the reference branch 0 to
proceed with the depletion calculation. The process repeats following
each depletion subinterval, until all depletion subintervals are
simulated. Responses of interest are added to the database file for all
branches at each depletion subinterval.

.. _fig3-1-8:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig8.png
  :align: center
  :width: 500

  Schematic illustration of T-DEPL branch calculations during depletion.

Branch perturbations may be applied to any of the following five
parameters: fuel temperature, moderator temperature, moderator density,
moderator soluble boron concentration, and control rod insertion. These
properties may be varied individually or simultaneously. Branch
calculations are specified in the TRITON *BRANCH* data block. The
*BRANCH* data block has the following form.

::

  READ branch
  define deftype   I1 I2 ... In end
  ...
  tf=fueltemp tm=modtemp dm=moddens sb=boronconc cr=inout end
  ...
  END branch

where

  *deftype* = 'fuel,' 'mod,' 'crout', or 'crin',

  *I\ i* = list of materials associated with type definition *deftype*,

  *fueltemp* = branch fuel temperature (K),

  *modtemp* = branch moderator temperature (K),

  *moddens* = branch moderator density (g/cm\ :sup:`3`),

  *boronconc* = soluble boron concentrations (ppm),

  *inout* = control rod/blade state (out = 0, in = 1).

The type definitions must come first within the *BRANCH* block, and at
least one definition is always required. The 'fuel' type definition is
used to specify which of the problem materials are considered to be fuel
during branch calculations; similarly, the 'mod' type definition
specifies the material or materials that are to be considered moderator.
The 'crout' definition specifies the materials that are in place in the
transport model when control structures are withdrawn, while the 'crin'
definition specifies the materials that are present in the transport
model when a control structure is inserted. The 'fuel' definition must
be present if any fuel temperature branches are performed. The 'mod'
type definition must be present whenever moderator temperature,
moderator density, or soluble boron branches are performed. Both the
'crout' and 'crin' definitions must be present if control rod branches
are requested. Definitions may not be repeated—for example, 'define
fuel' may occur only once.

Type definitions are followed by branch specifications. For each branch,
one or more branch specifications may be given; if a particular property
is omitted, then the reference conditions of the original model and
material specifications are used. **The first branch specification must
describe the nominal conditions,** and all parameters must be specified
for this branch. Each branch specification can optionally define up to
five branch keywords before terminating with the *end* keyword. The five
branch keywords are as follows.

   `` tf`` = fuel temperature (K),

   `` tm`` = moderator temperature (K),

   `` dm`` = moderator density (g/cm\ :sup:`3`),

   `` sb`` = soluble boron concentration (ppm boron), and

   `` cr`` = control rod state (out = 0, in = 1).

The format of a *BRANCH* block is best illustrated by an example.
:numref:`fig3-1-9` shows a complete branch data block for a five-branch
calculation, with embedded descriptions of each branch. Note that there
are six entries; the first branch is the reference or branch 0 state.

In this example, materials 11 and 12 are specified as 'fuel', and fuel
temperature perturbations will be applied to only these materials. The
nominal temperature for both materials is determined from the branch 0
input (901 K). The nominal fuel temperature must be the same for all
materials in the definition and must be consistent with the initial
standard composition input. Similarly, materials 13 and 14 are defined
as the moderator materials. The temperature (559 K), density (0.76
g/cm\ :sup:`3`), and soluble boron concentrations (655 ppm) for the
reference state must be identical to those of the initial material
specifications and must be identical for all materials defined as
moderator.

.. _fig3-1-9:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig9.svg
  :align: center
  :width: 500


In a reactor core, when a control structure (rod, blade, etc.) is
withdrawn, the volume occupied by the structure is replaced by something
else. Thus, in a branch calculation with rod insertion and withdrawal,
the material(s) present for both states must be specified. If the
reference condition is defined as control rods withdrawn (i.e., cr = 0),
the NEWT geometry model must contain the materials defined by 'crout'.
For a control rod insertion branch (cr = 1), TRITON exchanges the
materials specified in the 'crin' definition (30, 31) with corresponding
materials in the 'crout' definition (20, 21). Conversely, if the
reference condition is defined as control rods inserted (i.e., cr = 1),
the NEWT geometry model must contain the materials defined by 'crin'.
For a control rod withdrawal branch (cr = 0), TRITON exchanges the
materials specified in the 'crout' definition with corresponding
materials in the 'crin' definition. For this reason, unique material
numbers must be paired between crin and crout definitions. For example,
consider a zirc-clad B\ :sub:`4`\ C control rod inserted during a
control rod insertion branch, with materials 30 and 31 representing the
clad and rod materials, respectively. In the withdrawn position, both
the clad and poison materials are replaced by the moderator. To have
consistent definitions of 'crin' and 'crout', two moderator materials
must be defined for the withdrawn state: one corresponding to the clad
material and one corresponding to the rod material.

As mentioned earlier, only one condition keyword is required per branch,
but all five may be used. However, the reference state (branch 0) entry
must specify all five conditions. For subsequent branches, when a
specific branch state is not specified, the reference state is used. In
the above example, the first entry, branch zero, specifies the reference
state with a fuel temperature of 901 K, moderator temperature of 559 K,
moderator density of 0.4 g/cm\ :sup:`3`, control rod withdrawn, and a
soluble boron concentration of 655 ppm. The second entry (branch 1)
specifies a moderator density of 0.80 g/cm\ :sup:`3` and the control rod
state as withdrawn. Since the reference state is for a withdrawn control
rod, the statement cr = 0 is redundant (but completely acceptable). The
next branch is identical to the previous branch, except that in this
case the control rod is inserted. For both cases, reference fuel and
moderator temperatures were used. In the following branch, the soluble
boron concentration is changed to 20 ppm, and the moderator density is
again set to a value of 0.8 g/cm\ :sup:`3`. In fact, this moderator
density is applied to all five branches. Along with the moderator
density change, the soluble boron concentration is changed to 1300 ppm
for the next branch. And finally, in the last branch, in addition to the
moderator density change, the fuel temperature is changed to 559 K. For
this case, reference conditions are used for boron concentration,
moderator temperature, and control rod state.

Note that TRITON compares the reference values of fuel temperature,
moderator temperature, moderator density, and soluble boron
concentration with the data entered in the *COMPOSITION* block. TRITON
prints warning messages if the data in the *COMPOSITION* block and
*BRANCH* block are inconsistent. Also note that each branch calculation
is independent of other branch calculations. Thus, the order in which
branch calculations are computed is not important.

Branch calculations are usually requested for lattice physics analysis,
where the objective is to generate a database of few-group homogenized
cross sections for nodal core calculations. Thus, BRANCH blocks are used
in tandem with the NEWT’s *COLLAPSE, HOMOGENIZATION,* and *ADF* blocks.
With these blocks of data, TRITON will archive lattice physics
data—few-group homogenized cross sections, assembly discontinuity
factors (ADFs), homogenized kinetic parameters, pin powers, and form
factors—to a binary file called xfile016 in the SCALE temporary working
directory. An auxiliary text-formatted data file called txtfile16 is
also created in the SCALE temporary working directory. This file format
is documented in Appendix A (:ref:`3-1a` of TRITON.

.. _3-1-3-3-3:

BRANCH block with user-defined Dancoff factors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As previously mentioned in :ref:`3-1-3-1-2`, TRITON uses Dancoff factors
as part of its cross section processing calculations. Dancoff factors
play an important role in characterizing spatial self-shielding effects.
The XSProc module computes the Dancoff factors based on the *CELLDATA*
input. For a square-pitched lattice cell example, Dancoff factors are
computed by DANCOFF by assuming that the fuel pin is within an infinite
lattice of identical fuel pins. The assumption of an infinite uniform
lattice of fuel pins may lead to inaccurate Dancoff factors for certain
configurations such as BWR assembly designs, leading to inappropriate
problem-dependent multigroup cross sections. Moreover, the Dancoff
factors may change significantly for certain branch conditions, such as
changing the in-channel moderator density in a BWR assembly.

The TRITON BRANCH block allows the user to specify material-dependent
Dancoff factors for various branch conditions. Branch-specific Dancoff
factors may be utilized by defining a new set of material-dependent
Dancoff factors using the *d2pset* type definition. The set of Dancoff
factors may be included in a branch specification by using the *d2p=*
keyword. The *BRANCH* block now has the following format.

::

  READ branch
  define deftype   I1 I2 ... In end
  define d2pset id M1 D1 M2 D2 ... Mn Dn end
  ...
  tf=fueltemp tm=modtemp dm=moddens sb=boronconc cr=inout d2p=d2pID end
  ...
  END branch

In the type definition section, the *d2pset* keyword is followed by a
positive integer identifier, which is subsequently followed by pairs of
material identifiers and their user-defined Dancoff factor value.
Multiple material/Dancoff pairs may be entered for a particular set
definition, as long as the material identifiers are unique. Multiple set
definitions are allowed, as long as the set identifiers are unique.

The *d2p=* keyword in the branch specification can be assigned to any
set identifier defined in the branch definition section. If *d2p=* is
utilized, the material/Dancoff pairs in the set definition are applied
for the given branch condition. The values *d2p=0* and *d2p=-1* have
special meaning. If *d2p=* is set to 0, the material/Dancoff pairs
defined in the *CELLDATA* block are utilized. If *d2p=* is set to -1,
the default MIPLIB-computed Dancoff factors will be utilized, even if
material/Dancoff pairs are defined in the *CELLDATA* block using the
*dan2pitch* keyword available there. The nominal (branch 0) condition
**must** use the material/Dancoff pairs (if defined) in the *CELLDATA*
block; therefore, the first branch specification **must** not set the
*d2p* keyword to anything other than zero. (Note: *d2p=0* need not be
defined for the first branch condition since this is always the case.)

In :numref:`fig3-1-10`, the *BRANCH* block from the previous example has been
modified to use branch-specific Dancoff factors. In this example, the
nominal branch defines the reference moderator density to be
0.4 g/cm\ :sup:`3`, and five branches use a higher moderator density of
0.8 g/cm\ :sup:`3`. The Dancoff factors for the higher moderator density
condition are different from the reference moderator density. To account
for the different Dancoff factors at the higher moderator density
condition, a set of material/Dancoff pairs are defined with the set
identifier of 400. In the set, fuel material 11 has a Dancoff factor of
0.4, and fuel material 12 has a Dancoff factor of 0.5. The set of
Dancoff factors is used for the five branch states through the
specification of the *d2p=* keyword to 400.

.. _fig3-1-10:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig10.svg
  :align: center
  :width: 500

  *Example BRANCH block input with Dancoff factors.*

.. _3-1-3-3-4:

DE\ **P**\ LETION block
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The *DEPLETION* block, used by the four depletion sequences, is simple
in concept but performs four important functions. First, this block
specifies the materials for which depletion calculations are to be
performed. In general, it is desirable to perform depletion calculations
only for fuel and target materials of interest. Calculating the
depletion of gas gaps, cladding, moderator, or coolant is usually of
little value unless the material contains components that will be
significantly depleted with burnup. Additionally, it is not usually
desirable to deplete soluble poisons in reactor coolants. Therefore, the
*DEPLETION* block requires that the user specify the materials to be
depleted. There are no defaults; hence, the block is required for all
depletion sequences.

The second function of the *DEPLETION* block is to specify the basis to
which the model power is normalized. In general, the average
time-dependent power to which an irradiated object is exposed is known.
For example, an LWR fuel assembly discharged from a reactor is known to
have operated at certain power levels for one or more time periods. The
individual pins in the assembly will have varying power levels depending
on position and assembly design. In such a case, the basis for the input
power is the full assembly. Fluxes computed in the transport solution
will be normalized by TRITON based on reaction rates and energies **in
all problem materials** (depleted and nondepleted materials) such that
the assembly-wide power will match the power given in *BURNDATA* block.
However, it is often the case in radiochemical assay analysis that the
burnup history of a specific pin is known and isotopic concentrations
for that pin are desired. It is still necessary to model the full
assembly in order to properly characterize the fluxes in that pin. In
such a case, it would be advantageous to specify the operating history
for the pin instead of the full assembly. When this is done, the average
specific power of the full assembly will be different from that of the
pin and will be computed automatically based on power distributions
calculated for the assembly. In other words, powers for other materials
in the assembly will be normalized such that the power in the pin of
interest matches that specified in the *BURNDATA* block. The material of
that pin becomes the *basis* for power normalization.

:ref:`3-1-3-3-4-1` below describes the general format of the
*DEPLETION* block that is available to all four depletion sequences. The
third function of the *DEPLETION* block is an optional function used to
specify ORIGEN solver options and ORIGEN depletion mode for each
depletion material. These options are further described in Sect.
:ref:`3-1-3-3-4-2`. The fourth function of the *DEPLETION* block is to define
optional deletion instructions used to simplify cross section processing
using the ASSIGN function. Special provisions have been made in the 1D
and 2D depletion sequence (T-DEPL-1D and T-DEPL) to reduce the number of
cross section processing calculations in order to decrease calculation
run-time. The ASSIGN functionality is further described in Sect.
:ref:`3-1-3-3-4-3`.

.. _3-1-3-3-4-1:

Basic DEPLETION block format
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The basic format of the DEPLETION block is as follows:

::

  READ depletion M1 M2 M3... Mn END depletion

where M\ :sub:`i` represents the SCALE material numbers for materials to
be depleted. As discussed above, the *DEPLETION* block can also be used
to specify the basis for the input power. Power normalization is
accomplished by prefixing the material number(s) with a negative sign
(–). For example, consider a problem in which materials 1, 2, and 3 are
being depleted, but the power for material 1 is known. The *DEPLETION*
block for this case is

::

  READ depletion -1 2 3 END depletion

In this case, powers for all materials will be normalized such that the
power in material 1 matches the input power specification in the
*BURNDATA* block.

Note that multiple materials can be used as a power basis. Consider a
fuel assembly with three fuel types represented by materials 1, 2, and
3, and also containing cladding as material 4 and water as material 5.
:numref:`tab3-1-2` illustrates multiple ways that the power basis for this
assembly might be specified and describes the effect of each
specification.

.. _tab3-1-2:
.. table:: Effects of different power basis specifications.
  :align: center

  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | ``READ depletion``                | The assembly-averaged power is    |
  | ``1 2 3``                         | normalized to match the input     |
  | ``END depletion``                 | specific power                    |
  +===================================+===================================+
  | ``READ depletion``                | The assembly-averaged power is    |
  |                                   | normalized such that the power of |
  | ``-1 2 3``                        | material 1 matches the input      |
  |                                   | specific power                    |
  | ``END depletion``                 |                                   |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | ``READ depletion``                | The assembly-averaged power is    |
  |                                   | normalized such that the average  |
  | ``-1 -2 3``                       | power in materials 1 and 2        |
  |                                   | matches the input specific power  |
  | ``END depletion``                 |                                   |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | ``READ depletion``                | The assembly-averaged power is    |
  |                                   | normalized to match input         |
  | ``1 2 3 4 5``                     | specific powers. TRITON will      |
  |                                   | attempt to do depletion in        |
  | ``END depletion``                 | cladding and moderator materials  |
  |                                   | too. (Note that cladding and      |
  |                                   | moderator materials should be     |
  |                                   | depleted using the                |
  |                                   | deplete-by-flux option described  |
  |                                   | in the next subsection)           |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | ``READ depletion``                | The assembly-averaged power is    |
  |                                   | normalized such that the average  |
  | ``-1 -2 -3``                      | power in materials 1–3 matches    |
  |                                   | the input specific power. This is |
  | ``END depletion``                 | not the same as the normalizing   |
  |                                   | specification for an assembly     |
  |                                   | average, because it neglects      |
  |                                   | contributions of n-γ sources in   |
  |                                   | moderator and cladding materials  |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

.. _3-1-3-3-4-2:

ORIGEN depletion options
''''''''''''''''''''''''

ORIGEN provides two input options for the flux used in the depletion
calculation: direct specification of fluxes (i.e., deplete by flux) or
indirect specification of fluxes in terms of power (i.e., deplete by
power). The ORIGEN depletion is based on a known flux; however, it is
more often the case that one knows the specific power in a depletion
region rather than the actual flux. When ORIGEN is used in
deplete-by-power mode, ORIGEN will internally determine the
corresponding flux from the input-specific power and internal tables of
fission and capture energy releases for the nuclides present and the
macroscopic cross sections of those nuclides. Additionally, at each
ORIGEN time interval, ORIGEN recalculates the material power density as
nuclide inventories change. Hence, the deplete-by-power mode will result
in a time-varying flux, whereas the deplete-by-flux mode will result in
a constant flux over the calculation time interval. Since reactors
typically operate at a constant (or nearly so) power level, with varying
local fluxes, the deplete-by-power option is closer to reality. However,
the choice of approach is generally not an issue. Significant
differences between calculation results between the two depletion modes
would indicate that the TRITON depletion subintervals are too large.

By default, all TRITON depletion materials use the deplete-by-power
mode. However, there exist some circumstances where deplete-by-flux is
more appropriate. In deplete-by-power mode, ORIGEN will often halt when
an attempt to maintain constant power results in a large change in flux
between ORIGEN time intervals. Large changes in flux can occur in media
where isotope contents are changing rapidly with time, such as in a
gadolinium-bearing burnable absorber rod, where gadolinium is being
rapidly depleted with time. Another circumstance pertains to activation
analysis of nonfuel materials. The flux for these materials is typically
governed by external power sources (i.e., fuel materials located
elsewhere in the problem domain) rather than by internal power sources.
Therefore, the deplete-by-flux option is recommended for these
materials.

TRITON provides the option to specify deplete-by-flux mode for selected
depletion materials using a modified form of the depletion
specification:

::

  READ depletion M1 M2 M3...Mi-1 flux Mi Mi+1... Mn END depletion

Materials preceding the *flux* keyword are depleted using the
deplete-by-power mode; materials following the flux keyword are depleted
using the deplete-by-flux mode. For example, consider a problem in which
materials 1–6 are to be depleted, but materials 3 and 4 represent
nonfuel materials that do not contribute significantly to the total
power and are therefore to be depleted assuming constant flux. The
*DEPLETION* block for this situation could be specified as follows.

::

  READ depletion 1 2 5 6 flux 3 4 END depletion

The DEPLETION block also supports the specification of the ORIGEN
calculation method. The default option is solver=matrex, which
represents the matrix exponential option. The other option is
solver=cram, which represents the new CRAM solver option in ORIGEN. An
example depletion specification for the cram solver is as follows.

::

  READ depletion 1 2 5 6 flux 3 4 solver=cram END depletion

.. _3-1-3-3-4-3:

Cross section processing simplification using ASSIGN
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

When depleting a large number of fuel materials, considerable time may
be spent in the cross section processing calculations prior to the
multigroup transport calculation. Fuel assembly designs may require
20-200 unique depletion materials across the different fuel pins in the
assembly. In such cases, an assembly model may require hours of run-time
for each pin-wise cross section processing calculation in order to
perform a 10-minute transport solution.

Although highly rigorous, such a cross section processing process is
extremely burdensome for depletion calculations, especially if branch
calculations are requested. To reduce run-time, the 2D depletion
sequence (*T-DEPL*) provides the option to group depletion materials
together such that they are tracked independently in the depletion
calculation but use a common set of microscopic cross sections. The
microscopic cross sections for a given depletion group are computed
using the average composition of all the depletion materials within the
group. Typically, this grouping is applied to fuel pins of identical
initial composition. Although the nuclide number densities of such pins
will diverge with burnup as a function of location within an assembly,
the cross sections of these pins are well represented by a single pin
cell calculation with an average composition representative of all these
pins.

Although the material grouping option introduces approximations in the
cross section processing calculations, which in turn affects the
transport and depletion calculations, internal investigations have shown
that solution accuracy can be maintained for a wide range of assembly
designs while significantly improving the run-time.

The alternate format of the *DEPLETION* block for simplified cross
section processing is as follows.

::

  READ depletion M1 M2 M3... Mz END
  assign N1 Ma Mb ... Mx end
  assign N2 Mf Mg ... My end
  ...
  assign Nn Mj Mk ... Mz end
  END depletion

Similar to the basic format, each material designated for depletion
(M\ :sub:`i`) is listed after *READ* depletion and before the *END*
keyword. Each designated depletion material must be present in the 2D
NEWT model. After the first *END* keyword, the alternate format contains
a list of material “assignments” used to simplify cross section
processing for a group of depletion materials. The material assignments
begin with the *assign* keyword and terminate with the *end* keyword.
After the *assign* keyword, a unique representative material identifier
(N\ :sub:`j`) is defined. The representative material is associated with
the group of depletion materials that immediately follows in the
*assign* definition. The representative material identifier is used in
the *COMPOSITION* and *CELLDATA* blocks to define the initial
composition, temperature, and cell definition for the group of depletion
materials. Thus, the *assign* definitions in *TRITON* are currently
constrained such that each depletion material group must have the same
initial composition. After the last *assign* definition, the depletion
block is terminated with *END depletion*.

Only depletion materials may be assigned to representative materials.
The group of depletion materials assigned to a particular representative
material must **not** appear in the *COMPOSITION* and *CELLDATA* blocks.

The use of material assignments is best illustrated by an example.
:numref:`fig3-1-11` shows a complete T‑DEPL input that uses material
assignments. A 2D plot of the model is shown in :numref:`fig3-1-12`. In this
example, two fuel materials are defined as materials 1 and 2 in the
*COMPOSITON* block. In the *DEPLETION* block, the list of depletion
materials includes materials 1, 20, 30, and 40. Depletion materials 20,
30, and 40 are “assigned” to representative material 2. Material 2 does
not appear in the depletion list or the transport model; materials 20,
30, and 40 do. But only material 2 is defined in the *COMPOSITION* and
*CELLDATA* blocks. In the transport model, four units are defined, one
for each material. An array is used to place each unit in its own
location.

The initial calculation uses material 2 to define the compositions of
materials 20, 30, and 40, since all are initially identical. Microscopic
cross sections computed for material 2 are used for each of the three
assigned depletion materials during the transport calculation and the
depletion calculation. After the first depletion calculation, materials
20, 30, and 40 will have different isotopic concentrations because of
different locations in the nonsymmetric transport model. At this time,
the number densities in each of these three materials are averaged and
used to update the concentration of representative material 2. A new set
of cell calculations will be performed for materials 1 and 2; this will
be followed by a transport calculation that uses the microscopic cross
sections for material 2 along with local nuclide number densities for
materials 20, 30, and 40 to calculate new and unique macroscopic cross
sections for each. The transport and subsequent depletion calculation
are then run. The iterative process will continue until all depletion
steps have been completed.

.. _fig3-1-11:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig11.svg
  :align: center
  :width: 800

  Example input with material assignments.


.. _fig3-1-12:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig12.png
  :align: center
  :width: 500

  Example 2D model plot of material assignments.

The use of assignments can make a considerable difference in run-time
performance with minimal sacrifice in accuracy. The above example ran
1.8 times faster using the assignment of three similar pins to one
initial specification. A larger BWR calculation, in which 41 pin
positions were depleted independently, was run in an assessment of the
accuracy of the method. Using this approach, the simplified
representation ran 20 depletion steps in 20% of the time required for
the explicitly modeled cells. :numref:`fig3-1-13` shows a comparison of the
eigenvalues using the simplified (with assignments) and explicit
(without assignments) models. Also shown on the figure is the percent
difference between the approximate and explicit models. For this model,
the error in *k*\ :sub:`eff` remains well below 0.05%.

Note that one can combine depletion mode control with material
assignments, as follows.

::

  READ depletion 1 2 5 6
            flux 3 4 end
           assign 11 1 2 end
           assign 12 3 4 end
           assign 13 5 6 end
  END depletion

.. _fig3-1-13:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig13.png
  :align: center
  :width: 500

  Eigenvalue comparison of simplified cross section processing example.

.. _3-1-3-3-5:

TIMETABLE block
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In many depletion analyses, material properties can change due to
influences outside the depletion process (e.g., boron letdown in
pressurized water reactors [PWRs], the insertion or removal of poisons
during or between fuel cycles, or changes in temperatures of materials
with time). The *TIMETABLE* block has been provided to allow
modification of properties during a depletion calculation. Timetables
may be entered for any material or for select nuclides within a material
and allow changes in number densities or temperatures. Timetables may
also be entered to swap a material in and out of the geometry during
depletion.

The *TIMETABLE* block takes the following general format.

::

  READ timetable
  [time dependent specifications for a given material]
  [time dependent specifications for a given material]
  [time dependent specifications for a given material]
  END timetable

Three different material specifications are allowed to modify
temperature, density, or swap materials.

Temperature timetable entries are specified in the format

::

  temperature I t1 K1 t2 K2 t3 K3...tC KC end

where

  *I* = material ID number;

  *t*\ :sub:`i` = time (days) in calculation where temperature *K*\ :sub:`i` is set, *i*
  = 1 to C;

  *K*\ :sub:`i` = temperature (in K) of specified materials at time *t*\ :sub:`i`, *i* =
  1 to C;

  *C* = number of time steps.

Density entries have an analogous specification, with the addition of a couple of extra terms:

::

  density  I  M N1 N2 N3 ... NM   t1 D1 t2 D2 t3 D3...tC DC end

where

  *I* = material ID number;

  *M* = number of nuclides to which this change is applied;

  *N*\ :sub:`i` = nuclide ID for the *i*\ :sub:`th` nuclide in the list, *i* = 1 to M;

  *t*\ :sub:`j` = time (days) in calculation where density multiplier D\ :sub:`j`
  is set, *i* = 1 to C;

  *D*\ :sub:`j` = density multiplier (fractional change) of specified nuclides at
  time *t*\ :sub:`j`, *i* = 1 to C;

  *C* = number of time steps.

In both formats, time and data (temperature or density multiplier) must
be entered in pairs. Note that density changes may be applied to
specific nuclides, while for temperature the change must be applied to
all nuclides within the material simultaneously. If *M* (the number of
nuclides for which the density is to be modified) is specified as 0 and
no nuclide IDs are entered, then the timetable values are applied to all
nuclides in the material.

Note that timetable entries are specified at distinct times in the
calculation. These times are measured relative to the beginning of the
calculation and are continuous (as opposed to *BURNDATA* entries, which
give burn times or down times in increments per depletion interval). The
initial timetable entry should always begin at t=0 days. To allow for
time-dependent changes in properties, TRITON applies linear
interpolation between data pairs. To hold a parameter constant over a
time interval, that parameter should be specified at the same value at
both the beginning and the end of this time interval.

The application of timetable entries is best illustrated by example.
Consider the depletion scheme described by the *BURNDATA* block of
:numref:`fig3-1-7`, which contains three depletion intervals. Assume that the
moderator, material 3, has temperatures and boron concentrations that
vary over the three depletion intervals in the following manner:

+--------------+-------------------------+-----------------+-----+
| **Interval** | **Boron concentration** | **Temperature** |     |
|              |                         |                 |     |
|              | **(ppm)**               | **(K)**         |     |
+==============+=========================+=================+=====+
|              | **BOC**                 | **EOC**         |     |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------------+-----+
| 1            | 1000                    | 100             | 615 |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------------+-----+
| 2            | 1250                    | 130             | 685 |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------------+-----+
| 3            | 980                     | 100             | 610 |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------------+-----+


.. _fig3-1-14:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig14.png
  :align: center
  :width: 500

  Example temperature and density *TIMETABLE* block input.

It is important to note that time-dependent changes to temperatures and
number densities are not applied continuously over the depletion
calculation but instead are applied only at the times at which cross
section processing and transport calculations are performed—that is, the
midpoint of the depletion subintervals. *The user must determine the
accurate depletion scheme specific to his or her application to
accurately model time-dependent changes in system properties.*

Density timetable specifications can be used to effectively exchange
compositions of a single material. One may construct a compound material
comprised of two distinct materials at their design densities; a
timetable specification can be used to set the density multiplier to 1.0
for the nuclides initially present and to use a multiplier of 0.0 for
all nuclides in materials that are not intended to be present at time
zero. The timetable can then affect the exchange by changing the
multipliers from 0 to 1, and from 1 to 0, at the time of the material
exchange. One must bear in mind that timetable processing within TRITON
performs linear interpolation between time points; if the exchange is
intended to occur at a specific moment in time, then the timetable
should be set up with the exchange occurring within a very short period.
Moreover, it is important to note that material exchanges for two
materials that have common nuclides are more difficult to model. For
example, a B\ :sub:`4`\ C absorber material and borated H\ :sub:`2`\ O
moderator material both contain boron nuclides in common. In order to
exchange the B\ :sub:`4`\ C absorber material and the borated
H\ :sub:`2`\ O moderator material, the carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen
density multipliers would be 0 or 1, but the boron density multipliers
would need to be derived from the boron concentrations in both
materials.

Material exchange timetables offer another option to users to exchange
one material with another material during depletion calculations.

Material exchange timetable has a similar format to temperature
timetables:

::

  swap I1 I2 t1 S1 t2 S2 t3 S3...tC SC end

where

  *I1* = first material ID

  *I2* = second material ID

  *t*\ :sub:`j` = time (days) in calculation where swap ID is set, *i* = 1 to C;

  *S*\ :sub:`j` = swap value 0/1 at time *t*\ :sub:`j`, *i* = 1 to C;

  *C* = number of time steps.

The first two entries in the timetable specify the material IDs for swap
materials. The remaining entries are entered in pairs: the first pair
value is a time value, the second pair value is either “0” or “1”. ­“0”
instructs TRITON to model the swap materials as defined in the nominal
model. “1” instructs TRITON to swap the materials (swap every *I1* for
every *I2* and swap every *I2* for every *I1*). The swap state persists
until the next time entry in the timetable. For the last time entry in
the timetable, the swap state persists for the duration of the
calculation. For the example:

::

  read timetable
    swap 5 6  0 0  100 1  200 0 end
  read timetable

-  Do not perform the material swap on the interval [0, 100],

-  Perform the material swap on the interval [100, 200], and

-  Return to the nominal state at time 200 days until the duration of
   the calculation.

Depending on the *BURNDATA* specification, there may be one or more
depletion/decay steps between timetable entries. Moreover, for accurate
depletion modeling, material exchanges must not occur during a depletion
subinterval. If a material exchange occurs during a depletion interval,
TRITON will subdivide the depletion subinterval at the time of the
material exchange. Extending the example above, assume the *BURNDATA*
block is as follows:

::

  read timetable
    swap 5 6  0 0  100 1  200 0 end
  read timetable
  read burndata
   power=40 burn=300 nlib=4 end
  end burndata

Without the material exchange table, the depletion subintervals are [0,
75], [75, 150], [150, 225], and [225, 300]. With the material exchange
table, the subintervals are:

-  [0, 75] – Swap value is 0

-  [75, 100] – Swap value is 0

-  [100-150] – Swap value is 1, i.e. materials 5 and 6 swap definitions

-  [150-200] – Swap value is 1, i.e. materials 5 and 6 swap definitions

-  [200-225] – Swap value is 0, materials 5 and 6 return to their
   original definitions

-  [225-300] – Swap value is 0

As a limitation of the material exchange timetable, if a depletion
material is removed from the geometry, the isotope concentrations at the
time of removal are stored in‑memory, and then reused upon re-entry into
the geometry. In other words, the depletion material does not undergo
radioactive decay for the period of time outside the problem geometry.

.. _3-1-3-3-6:

OPUS block
^^^^^^^^^^

The OPUS module of SCALE is fully documented in the OPUS chapter of the
SCALE manual. OPUS provides the ability to extract specific data from
ORIGEN output libraries, perform unit conversions, and generate plot
data for post-calculation analysis. In essence, OPUS is an ORIGEN
post-processor that provides data in the desired form for a desired
subset of nuclides. TRITON by default calls OPUS to extract nuclide
concentrations for selected nuclides for all depletion materials and for
the most important nuclides. TRITON provides the capability to specify
the full set of OPUS commands to tailor OPUS calculations to obtain
specific information. TRITON allows a stacked set of OPUS calculations
in order to retrieve selected data for selected nuclides.

The content of the *OPUS* block is based on standard OPUS input
parameters, as described in the OPUS chapter; the details of OPUS
control and use are not repeated here. However, additional input is
necessary to support TRITON operations with OPUS, because TRITON enables
additional capabilities beyond those provided for in standard OPUS
input. For example, OPUS is designed to process the output file from a
single ORIGEN calculation; because ORIGEN is a point depletion solver,
the output represents data from a single material. TRITON is typically
used to perform multiple depletion calculations at each depletion
step—one calculation for each material being depleted. Hence, multiple
OPUS calculations are needed to obtain results from multiple materials.
The OPUS calculations are performed automatically by TRITON but require
the user to specify the materials for which OPUS processing is desired.
Additionally, TRITON supports stacked OPUS cases within the *READ OPUS*
data block; hence, keywords are introduced to separate stacked cases.

There are two alternatives available to SCALE users that are
complimentary to the OPUS block within TRITON. First, standalone OPUS
case(s) can be used to post process the ORIGEN binary concentration file
(.f71 extension). This file is automatically saved in the output
directory with the file name ``${OUTBASENAME}.f71``. (e.g. if the input file
is reactor.inp, the concentration file is saved in the output directory
as reactor.f71) Second, the user may also open the concentration file
within Fulcrum to enable similar post-processing capabilities.

.. _3-1-3-3-6-1:

Selection of materials for OPUS processing
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Beyond standard OPUS input keywords (see OPUS chapter), TRITON reads a
*matl=* keyword to allow specification of ID number(s) for the
material(s) in the problem for which outputs are desired. The
*matl=…end* input keyword accepts one or more materials from the
*DEPLETION* data block for which OPUS processing is desired. If omitted,
OPUS processing will be performed for all materials in the *DEPLETION*
block. For example, consider the following *DEPLETION* and *OPUS* data
blocks:

::

  READ depletion 1 2 3 4 5 6 END depletion
  READ opus
  units=gram symnuc=u-234 u-235 u-236 u-238 pu-238 pu-239
  pu-240 pu-241 pu-242 pu-243 np-237 end
  time=year
  END opus

In this example, OPUS processing will be performed for all depletion
materials, 1–6. Adding a subset of materials using the *matl=* keyword,
for example.

::

  READ depletion 1 2 3 4 5 6 END depletion
  READ opus
  units=gram symnuc=u-234 u-235 u-236 u-238 pu-238 pu-239
  pu-240 pu-241 pu-242 pu-243 np-237 end
  time=year
  matl=1 2 3 end
  END opus

will result in OPUS calculations for materials 1, 2, and 3 only.

Although ORIGEN calculations are performed only for individual
materials, TRITON provides the capability of combining the results of
all or a subset of all depletion materials to get a multimaterial
average set of ORIGEN responses. TRITON provides two special ID numbers
for combining material results. Specification of material ID 0 will
return system-averaged results for the entire set of depletion materials
(typically, all fuel elements in a depletion model). Specification of
material –1 returns the average of only those materials with ID > 0
present in the *matl=* list. Again, this is best illustrated by example.
Specification of the data blocks

::

  READ depletion 1 2 3 4 5 6 END depletion
  READ opus
  units=gram symnuc=u-234 u-235 u-236 u-238 pu-238 pu-239
  pu-240 pu-241 pu-242 pu-243 np-237 end
  time=year
  matl=1 2 3 0 -1 end
  END opus

will result in five OPUS calculations and five sets of results—one for
each of materials 1, 2, and 3, one for the average of materials 1–6 (due
to input of material ID 0), and one for the average of materials 1–3
(due to input of material ID –1).

.. _3-1-3-3-6-2:

Specification of stacked OPUS cases
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

In a given calculation, multiple output units may be desired (e.g.,
grams, curies, and watts), or multiple time scales (e.g., seconds and
years), or a combination of these or other parameters. TRITON provides
the ability to stack inputs such that multiple cases may be run within a
single TRITON calculation. In order to stack cases, the keywords *new
case* are entered in the input stream. Any parameters following these
keywords are used to define a new OPUS case.

There is no limit on the number of stacked cases that may be input;
however, the *matl=* specification may be used only in the first case.
OPUS calculations are run for each of the materials in this list, for
all cases.

Consider a depletion calculation where gadolinium pins are present in
the assembly design. One may wish to determine the quantities of
gadolinium nuclides from the initial poison rods (tracked as a light
element by ORIGEN within TRITON) and from fission (tracked as a fission
product by ORIGEN). One may also need masses of selected actinides as
well as the total (α,n) reaction rate. :numref:`fig3-1-15` shows how the *new
case* keyword set is used to define unique OPUS calculations. In this
example, the *new case* keywords are shown in upper case and on a line
by themselves, but this has been done only for readability. The text may
be entered in lower case and on the same line as other keywords. Note,
however, that the *matl=* specification is given only in the first case.
All OPUS calculations will be performed for materials 1, 2, and 3 and
for the average of these three materials.

.. _fig3-1-15:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig15.svg
  :align: center
  :width: 500

  Example OPUS block input.

.. _3-1-3-4:

S/U analysis input
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

An example input structure for the sensitivity and uncertainty (S/U)
analysis sequences is provided in :numref:`fig3-1-16`.

.. _fig3-1-16:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig16.svg
  :align: center
  :width: 500

  Structure of S/U analysis input.

The TRITON S/U sequences support the blocks of data highlighted in red:
the *SAMS, HTML, COVARIANCE, DEFINITIONS,* and *SYSTEMRESPONSES* data
blocks. These data blocks, along with the *KEEP_OUTPUT* block, may
appear only once, in any order, and must follow the *COMPOSITION* and
*CELLDATA* blocks and must precede the *MODEL* block. If specified, the
*HTML* and *COVARIANCE* blocks must follow the *SAMS* block.

These five blocks of data serve the same function as described in the
TSUNAMI-1D manual, and the information is not repeated here.

The *MODEL* block contains a full NEWT transport model input description
and is required for both S/U analysis sequences. *The* MODEL *block must
be the last block of data in the input file.* The *MODEL* block provides
the physical layout of the configuration for which the transport
calculation is to be performed, along with general control parameters.
The NEWT input is described fully in the NEWT chapter and is not
repeated here.

.. _3-1-3-5:

*ALIAS* block
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The optional *ALIAS* block may be used to simplify model development
within TRITON by defining a set of material numbers that will be
inserted in place of the alias when that alias is used in subsequent
data blocks. Aliases function as variables for which a user-defined set
of materials are inserted; they are identified by a dollar character ($)
preceding a single-word alphanumeric label. The *ALIAS* block is used to
preprocess an input, creating a new, modified input deck with all alias
variable substitutions included. TRITON then processes the modified
input deck before proceeding with the calculation.

The use of an alias variable is best illustrated by a brief example.
Assume that the alias ``$fuel`` is defined as materials 1, 2, and 3, and
``$mod`` as materials 4, 5, and 6. (The input format for defining aliases is
described below.) The user wishes to create three identical sets of
materials and use them in three identical pin cell specifications. In
the *COMPOSITION* data block, specifications could be written in the
following form

::

  h2o $mod den=0.6616 1.0 595 end
  wtpt-boron $mod 0.6616 1 5000 100 655e-6 595 end

TRITON would create a modified input with the alias expanded as follows:

::

  uo2  1 den=10.29 0.9322 920 92235 3.0 92238 97.0 end
  uo2  2 den=10.29 0.9322 920 92235 3.0 92238 97.0 end
  uo2  3 den=10.29 0.9322 920 92235 3.0 92238 97.0 end
  h2o 4 den=0.6616 1.0 595 end
  h2o 5 den=0.6616 1.0 595 end
  h2o 6 den=0.6616 1.0 595 end
  wtpt-boron  4 0.6616 1 5000 100 655e-6 595 end
  wtpt-boron  5 0.6616 1 5000 100 655e-6 595 end
  wtpt-boron  6 0.6616 1 5000 100 655e-6 595 end

Similarly, if the alias were used in the *CELLDATA* block as

::

  latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.26 $mod fuelr=0.4095 $fuel end

then TRITON would expand the aliases to

::

  latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.26 4 fuelr=0.4095 1 end
  latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.26 5 fuelr=0.4095 2 end
  latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.26 6 fuelr=0.4095 3 end

In a depletion calculation, one may wish to deplete a large number of
fuel rods independently because of different geometric locations in a
fuel assembly. Even though each fuel rod may have the same initial
composition, each must be specified as a unique material composition in
order to be depleted independently. Furthermore, multiple cell
specifications must all use unique material identifiers for each cell
component. Thus, if one desired to deplete 25 fuel materials in a
fuel/clad/moderator pin cell, one would need to set up material
composition definitions for 25 fuels, 25 moderators, and 25 clads. Then
one would need to provide 25 pin cell specifications. By using aliases,
one need only specify the material identifiers corresponding to each
alias and then provide only one material composition specification for
each alias type, and then one pin cell specification. TRITON will
automatically expand the aliases and create a revised input with all
materials and cell specifications explicitly defined.

.. note:: Note that
  although this will simplify the pin cell input in the CELLDATA, 25 pin
  cell calculations would still be required. The number of pin cell
  calculations can be reduced by using the ASSIGN function described in
  :ref:`3-1-3-3-4-3`.

The purpose of the *ALIAS* block is to define a set of alias variables
to be used in subsequent data blocks. The *ALIAS* block is optional, but
aliases may not be used in other blocks if an *ALIAS* block is not
present to define the aliases. An *ALIAS* block may contain as many
aliases as desired. Each alias specification consists of three parts:
the alias name, consisting of a dollar sign followed by up to 11
alphanumeric characters with no embedded spaces; the material number or
numbers; and an *end* keyword. Material numbers may be entered in any
order and may be separated by spaces or commas (or both). Material
numbers may also be separated by a dash (-), but this represents an
inclusive list. In other words, a material specification of 1-3 (or 1 -
3) indicates materials 1, 2, and 3. The example *ALIAS* block below
illustrates the various means for assigning a set of materials for an
alias definition.

::

  read alias
  $fueltype1 1 2 3 end
  $fueltype2 4,5,6, 31-33 end
  $clad1 21,22,23 end
  $clad2 24 25 26 34-36 end
  $mod1 11    -   13 end
  $mod2 14-16, 37-39 end
  end alias

The *ALIAS* block simply serves to assign material identifiers to
specific variables, and the variables are used in subsequent data
blocks. The same material identifier can be used in more than one alias
if desired. As indicated earlier, TRITON will preprocess any input deck
containing an *ALIAS* block and replace instances of alias variables
with the appropriate material identifiers. The following subsections
describe how aliases are implemented in TRITON’s various input blocks,
as the form of alias variable substitution is block dependent. Aliases
are processed only in these input blocks; aliases used in other blocks
will result in an error.

.. _3-1-3-5-1:

*COMPOSITION* block aliases
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The *COMPOSITION* block uses aliases to create multiple copies of each
standard composition specification, replacing the alias variable with
each material identifier associated with the alias definition. For
example, consider the following alias definition in an *ALIAS* block:

::

  read alias
  $fuel 1 2 10 end
  end alias

and the standard composition specification:

::

  uo2 $fuel den=10.045 1 800 92235 2.5 92238 97.5 end

A modified TRITON input would be created with the standard composition
specification replaced by

::

  uo2  1 den=10.045 1 800 92235 2.5 92238 97.5 end
  uo2  2 den=10.045 1 800 92235 2.5 92238 97.5 end
  uo2 10 den=10.045 1 800 92235 2.5 92238 97.5 end

.. _3-1-3-5-2:

*CELLDATA* block aliases
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

*CELLDATA* block *latticecell* specifications typically contain more
than one material; therefore, multiple aliases are permitted in each
cell specification. However, this constrains the set of aliases used in
the cell specification to have the same number of material identifiers
associated with it.

Consider the *ALIAS* block:

::

  read alias
  $fuel 1-3 10 end
  $clad 4,5,6,11 end
  $mod 7 8-9 12 end
  end alias

All three aliases contain four materials each. One could then create a
single cell specification that uses one or more of these alias
variables, such as

::

  latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.26 $mod fuelr=0.41 $fuel cladr=0.50 $clad end

This would result in the following alias expansion by TRITON:

::

  latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.26  7 fuelr=0.41  1 cladr=0.50  4 end
  latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.26  8 fuelr=0.41  2 cladr=0.50  5 end
  latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.26  9 fuelr=0.41  3 cladr=0.50  6 end
  latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.26 12 fuelr=0.41 10 cladr=0.50 11 end

Material identifiers are substituted according to their position in the
alias definition (i.e., the first substitution will use the first
material associated with each alias, and the second expansion will use
the second material associated with each alias, etc.)

Material numbers should not be entered manually in a cell specification; for example,

::

  latticecell triangpitch pitch=1.26 $mod fuelr=0.4095 1 end

TRITON would allow this to occur and would create a set of cell specifications as follows:

::

  latticecell triangpitch pitch=1.26 2 fuelr=0.4095 1 end
  latticecell triangpitch pitch=1.26 3 fuelr=0.4095 1 end

where $mod was defined as materials 2 and 3. However, SCALE does not
allow the same material identifier to occur in two different cell
specifications, and the fact that material 1 occurs in two different
cell specifications would result in TRITON ending with an error. *Note
that alias expansions for*\ **multiregion**\ *and*\ **doublehet**\ *cell
specifications are not supported. Also note that TRITON will not
copy*\ **centrmdata**\ *and*\ **moredata**\ *specifications that follow
a cell specification that uses an alias variable.*

.. _3-1-3-5-3:

*DEPLETION* block aliases
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Aliases in the TRITON *DEPLETION* are simply replaced by the set of
materials associated with the alias. For example, the *ALIAS* block

::

  read alias
  $fuel 1 2 10 end
  end alias

and DEPLETION block

::

  read depletion 7 8 9 $fuel end depletion

would be expanded to

::

  read depletion 7 8 9 1 2 10 end depletion

Aliases may be mixed with actual material numbers in the depletion
block, along with the flux and assign keywords. *However, the negative
sign—used to define the basis for power normalization—cannot precede an
alias definition.*

.. _3-1-3-5-4:

*TIMETABLE* block aliases
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

*TIMETABLE* block alias expansion is similar to that of the
*COMPOSITION* block: TRITON will create a new timetable entry for each
material associated with the alias used in the *TIMETABLE* definition.
For the *TIMETABLE* block below, using the alias *$allmod*, unique
timetables will be created for each material identifier associated with
this alias variable.

.. note:: Note that alias expansion
  of **density** timetable entries is not yet supported.

::

  read timetable
  temperature $allmod
  0.0    615
  121.0  615
  121.01 685
  322.5  685
  352.5  610
  738.75 610 end
  end timetable

.. _3-1-3-5-5:

*BRANCH* block aliases
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Aliases may be used within the *define* keyword definitions of the
*BRANCH* block. Aliases are simply replaced by the list of materials
associated with the alias, as is done for the *DEPLETIO*\ N block.
Hence,

::

  read alias
  $fuel 1 2 10 end
  end alias

used with

::

  read branch
  define fuel $fuel end
  md=0.75 tm=559 tf=880 sb=0.0 cr=0 end
  tf=1600 end
  end branch

would be expanded to

::

  read branch
  define fuel 1 2 10 end
  md=0.75 tm=559 tf=880 sb=0.0 cr=0 end
  tf=1600 end
  end branch

.. _3-1-3-5-6:

NEWT *MATERIAL* block aliases
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The *MATERIAL* block within the NEWT model section of a TRITON input can
also use aliases. As with *COMPOSITION* and *TIMETABLE* entries, TRITON
will create a new material specification for each material represented
by an alias. For the sample material block below, using the alias
*$fuel*, unique material block entries will be created for each material
associated with the alias variable.

::

  read materials
  mix=$fuel pn=1  com=“3.25 wo uo2 fuel” end
  mix=21    pn=1  com=“zirc cladding”    end
  mix=31    pn=1  com=“water”            end
  end materials


If an alias were defined as

::

  $fuel 10 11 12 end

then the *MATERIAL* block would be expanded to

::

  read materials
  mix=10 pn=1  com=“3.25 wo uo2 fuel” end
  mix=11 pn=1  com=“3.25 wo uo2 fuel” end
  mix=12 pn=1  com=“3.25 wo uo2 fuel” end
  mix=21    pn=1  com=“zirc cladding”    end
  mix=31    pn=1  com=“water”            end
  end materials

.. _3-1-3-6:

*KEEP_OUTPUT* block
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When performing depletion calculations for a number of different
materials, TRITON output can become quite voluminous. Often, much of
that output is not needed for calculations that seek only eigenvalues,
sources, or concentrations as a function of irradiation history. TRITON
provides the ability to trim output to only those portions for which
output is desired. Output produced directly by the TRITON module is
always provided and cannot be disabled, but output from any other code
in the sequence can be automatically removed from the output listing.
Retaining certain output is accomplished using the *KEEP_OUTPUT* data
block.

The *KEEP_OUTPUT* data block provides the ability to preserve only
selected outputs. The format of this data block is

::

  read keep_output
  module_1 module_1 ... module_i ... module_N
  end keep_output

where ``module_i`` represents any valid module name from the list of modules
invoked by TRITON, as listed here:

  xsproc xsdrn newt kenova kenovi couple origen

By default, the output from all these modules is retained with the
exception of XSProc COUPLE and ORIGEN. SAMS and OPUS output is always
retained.

.. _3-1-3-7:

TRITON control parameters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

TRITON supports the following of control parameter options:

  parm=
    CHECK,
    CENTRM, 2REGION, XSLEVEL=N,
    WEIGHT, WEIGHT=N,
    ADDNUX=N,
    INFDCUTOFF=X,
    CXM=N,
    MAXDAYS=N

If an invalid control parameter option is specified, including
misspelled keywords, an error message will be generated and execution
terminated. TRITON also provides the ability to nest several control
parameter keywords together; to combine keywords (where appropriate), a
list may be entered, enclosed in parentheses, and separated by commas.
For example, to specify CHECK, 2REGION, and ADDNUX=1 at the same time,
input would begin with

::

  =t-depl  parm=(check, 2region,addnux=1)

The following subsections provide more detail on each of the control parameters listed above.

.. _3-1-3-7-1:

Check mode: *parm=check*
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Specification of *parm=check* will request that TRITON read all input
and ensure that no input errors are present, without running additional
calculations. In this mode, all input is set up as if a full calculation
will be run, but the sequence exits without any functional module
execution. The check mode is useful for debugging or obtaining processed
standard composition data, without actually running a calculation. It
can also be used to generate plot files for embedded NEWT and KENO
inputs for additional review and checking of input specifications. Of
course, some errors may be uncovered only by dynamically executing the
functional modules; hence, there are rare occasions where a *parm=check*
run will complete with no errors but will fail when run outside of check
mode as the problem begins to run.

.. _3-1-3-7-2:

Multigroup cross section processing options
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The most common use of *parm=* sequence control is in the selection of
an alternate multigroup cross section processing mode.

By default, XSProc enables both the BONAMI and CENTRM modules for cross
section processing. BONAMI-only XSProc calculations can be performed
using the control parameter *parm=bonami*.

TRITON also supports the control parameter *parm=(xslevel=N)*. The
*xslevel* parameter option initializes various CENTRM options for the
XSProc calculations. The *xslevel* option is equivalent to initializing
all unit cell calculations with the following *centrmdata*
specifications:

::

  parm=(xslevel=1):
  centrmdata
    npxs=5 nfst=0 nthr=3 nmf6=-1 alump=0.3 demin=0.125 pmc_omit=1 pmc_dilute=5.0e5
  end centrmdata
  parm=(xslevel=2):
    centrmdata npxs=5 nfst=0 nthr=3 nmf6=-1 end centrmdata
  parm=(xslevel=3):
     centrmdata alump=0.3 demin=0.125 pmc_omit=1 pmc_dilute=5.0e5 end centrmdata
  parm=(xslevel=4):
     [no centrmdata statement]

The option *parm=(xslevel=4)* is equivalent to *parm=centrm*. The option
*parm=(xslevel=3)* is the default for depletion sequences and is
equivalent to *parm=centrm* but with some minor approximations to
decrease run time. The option *parm=(xslevel=2)* is equivalent to
*parm=2region* for all sequences.

Note that the *xslevel=1* and *xslevel=3* options have additional
specifications for keywords *alump*, *demin*, *pmc_omit*, and
*pmc_dilute*. These keywords are further discussed in the XSProc
chapter. The additional keyword specifications are used to decrease
run-time for the CENTRM and PMC calculations. Internal investigations
have shown that the approximations introduced by the additional keyword
specifications have minimal impact on solution accuracy for a wide range
of calculations. Therefore the additional keyword specifications are
used by default for depletion calculations, where several CENTRM and PMC
calculations are necessary. The additional keyword values are not used
by default for nondepletion calculations to be consistent with the SCALE
CSAS5 and CSAS6 criticality sequences.

The TSUNAMI-2D sequence also invokes the BONAMIST module, a modified
version of BONAMI to support sensitivity calculations. TSUNAMI-2D
calculations may use parm=centrm, 2region, bonami, or xslevel. However,
these cross section processing options will not utilize the
sensitivity-enabled version of BONAMI.

.. _3-1-3-7-3:

Creating a broad group library: *parm=weight, parm=(weight=N)*
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Used in tandem with the TRITON T-NEWT sequence, the specification
*parm=weight* extends the sequence by setting up and executing the
MALOCS2 module to generate a weighted broad-group cross-library (AMPX
master format). The spectrum generated in the NEWT transport calculation
is used as the weighting function for the collapse. Additionally, the
broad-group library energy structure is defined by the NEWT *COLLASPE*
block.

The *parm=weight* option uses the problem-averaged flux spectrum for the
weighting function in the collapse. The problem may be a simple pin cell
or a full assembly. However, there may be cases where the flux in a
specific region or material is most appropriate for the spectral
collapse. TRITON allows identification of a specific material from which
the collapsing spectrum should be used. When specified in the form
*parm=(weight=N)*, the average flux determined for material N is used in
place of the total domain spectrum to perform the collapse.

TRITON sample problem 1 (:ref:`3-1-6-1`) provides an example of the use
of T-NEWT to produce a new broad-group library. Note that the
broad-group library produced in this calculation will reside in the
SCALE temporary working directory with the name *newxnlib* at the end of
the calculation. If the library will be needed for future calculations,
the user should use a shell script to copy the library back to a more
permanent location, and perhaps give it a more meaningful name. In
sample problem 1, the SCALE 252-group master library is collapsed to 56
energy groups.

The process for creating a broad-group master library is also supported
in the 2D depletion sequence T‑DEPL. When *parm=weight* or
*parm=(weight=N)* is specified in a depletion calculation, the input
cross section library must be one of the SCALE 238-group or 252-group
libraries, which will automatically be collapsed to the SCALE 49-group
or 56-group structure, respectively. An initial fine group calculation
is performed for the input configuration, and the flux from the solution
is used to create the broad group library. The initial calculation is
then repeated with the new broad group library, followed by the
remainder of the depletion calculation. *Note that for lattice physics
calculations, the NEWT* COLLAPSE *block will be based on the 49-group
(or 56-group) energy structure, not the fine group structure.*

It is important to note that the 252-group library contains intermediate
resonance parameters and other data that cannot be accurately collapsed
into 56-group data with the collapsing procedures available in MALOCS2.
These parameters are important for bonami-only cross section processing
calculations, i.e., *parm=bonami*. Therefore, the *parm=centrm* option
is recommended for follow-on application of the collapsed 56-group
collapsed library. The 238-group and 49-group libraries do not contain
intermediate resonance parameter data, and bonami-only processing is
available, provided that this cross section processing option and group
structure is suitable for the intended application.

.. _3-1-3-7-4:

Inclusion of additional nuclides for depletion: *parm=(addnux=N)*
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For depletion calculations, it is important to add trace quantities (1 ×
10\ :sup:`–20` at/b-cm) of certain nuclides to the inventories of
depletion materials in order to accurately track the nuclides’ impact on
cross section processing and transport calculations as a function of
burnup. By default, TRITON automatically adds to all fuel materials
trace quantities of a set of nuclides that have been determined to be
important in the characterization of spent fuel. TRITON recognizes fuel
materials as any material containing quantities of heavy metals (Z > 89)
in the standard composition specification.

TRITON provides user control of the set of nuclides added to a fuel
material through the *parm=(addnux=N)* control parameter, where N is an
integer value. For N = 0, no nuclides are added, which is generally a
very poor approximation and should only be used when the ramifications
are fully understood. For N = 1, a bare minimum set of 15 nuclides
(actinides) are added; this will generate improved number density
estimates for actinides in low-burnup fuels but will not update cross
sections for fission products of primary importance. Again, use of this
option is discouraged unless it addresses special modeling needs. For
N = 2, the default setting for the TRITON depletion sequences, 95
nuclides are added. N = 3 and N = 4 add 231 and 388 nuclides,
respectively. Note that in previous versions of TRITON, N = 2 would add
64 nuclides. The set of 64 nuclides is still supported by specifiying
*parm=(addnux=-2)* in the input. The default in the SCALE 6.1 release
remains *parm=(addnux=2).* :numref:`tab3-1-3` through :numref:`tab3-1-7` list the set
of nuclides added in trace quantities for each value of *addnux*.

.. _tab3-1-3:
.. table:: Additional nuclides added in trace quantities for *parm=(addnux=1)*.
  :align: center

  +----------------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
  |                      | :sup:`234`\ U  | :sup:`235`\ U  | :sup:`236`\ U  |
  +----------------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
  | :sup:`238`\ U        | :sup:`237`\ Np | :sup:`238`\ Pu | :sup:`239`\ Pu |
  +----------------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
  | :sup:`240`\ Pu       | :sup:`241`\ Pu | :sup:`242`\ Pu | :sup:`241`\ Am |
  +----------------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
  | :sup:`242`\ Am       | :sup:`243`\ Am | :sup:`242`\ Cm | :sup:`243`\ Cm |
  +----------------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
  | \*15 nuclides total. |                |                |                |
  +----------------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+

.. _tab3-1-4:
.. table:: Additional nuclides added in trace quantities for *parm=(addnux= -2)*.
  :align: center

  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`1`\ H     | :sup:`10`\ B    | :sup:`11`\ B    |                 |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`14`\ N    | :sup:`16`\ O    | :sup:`83`\ Kr   | :sup:`93`\ Nb   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`94`\ Zr   | :sup:`95`\ Mo   | :sup:`99`\ Tc   | :sup:`103`\ Rh  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`105`\ Rh  | :sup:`106`\ Ru  | :sup:`109`\ Ag  | :sup:`126`\ Sn  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`135`\ I   | :sup:`131`\ Xe  | :sup:`135`\ Xe  | :sup:`133`\ Cs  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`134`\ Cs  | :sup:`135`\ Cs  | :sup:`137`\ Cs  | :sup:`143`\ Pr  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`144`\ Ce  | :sup:`143`\ Nd  | :sup:`145`\ Nd  | :sup:`146`\ Nd  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`147`\ Nd  | :sup:`147`\ Pm  | :sup:`148`\ Pm  | :sup:`149`\ Pm  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`148`\ Nd  | :sup:`147`\ Sm  | :sup:`149`\ Sm  | :sup:`150`\ Sm  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`151`\ Sm  | :sup:`152`\ Sm  | :sup:`151`\ Eu  | :sup:`153`\ Eu  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`154`\ Eu  | :sup:`155`\ Eu  | :sup:`152`\ Gd  | :sup:`154`\ Gd  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`155`\ Gd  | :sup:`156`\ Gd  | :sup:`157`\ Gd  | :sup:`158`\ Gd  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`160`\ Gd  | :sup:`244`\ Cm  |                 |                 |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | \*49 additional |                 |                 |                 |
  | nuclides in     |                 |                 |                 |
  | addition to the |                 |                 |                 |
  | 15 nuclides     |                 |                 |                 |
  | added in        |                 |                 |                 |
  | addnux=1, for a |                 |                 |                 |
  | total of 64.    |                 |                 |                 |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+

.. _tab3-1-5:
.. table:: Additional nuclides added in trace quantities for *parm=(addnux=2)*.
  :align: center

  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`91`\ Zr   | :sup:`93`\ Zr   | :sup:`95`\ Zr   | :sup:`96`\ Zr   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`95`\ Nb   | :sup:`97`\ Mo   | :sup:`98`\ Mo   | :sup:`99`\ Mo   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`100`\ Mo  | :sup:`101`\ Ru  | :sup:`102`\ Ru  | :sup:`103`\ Ru  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`104`\ Ru  | :sup:`105`\ Pd  | :sup:`107`\ Pd  | :sup:`108`\ Pd  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`113`\ Cd  | :sup:`115`\ In  | :sup:`127`\ I   | :sup:`129`\ I   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`133`\ Xe  | :sup:`139`\ La  | :sup:`140`\ Ba  | :sup:`141`\ Ce  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`142`\ Ce  | :sup:`143`\ Ce  | :sup:`141`\ Pr  | :sup:`144`\ Nd  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`153`\ Sm  | :sup:`156`\ Eu  | :sup:`242m`\ Am |                 |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | \*31 additional                   |                 |                 |
  | nuclides in                       |                 |                 |
  | addition to the                   |                 |                 |
  | 15 nuclides in                    |                 |                 |
  | :numref:`tab3-1-3` and            |                 |                 |
  | 49 nuclides in                    |                 |                 |
  | :numref:`tab3-1-4`,               |                 |                 |
  | for a total of                    |                 |                 |
  | 95.                               |                 |                 |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+

.. _tab3-1-6:
.. table:: Additional nuclides added in trace quantities for *parm=(addnux=3)*.
  :align: center

  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`72`\ Ge   | :sup:`73`\ Ge   | :sup:`74`\ Ge   | :sup:`76`\ Ge   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`75`\ As   | :sup:`79`\ Br   | :sup:`76`\ Se   | :sup:`77`\ Se   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`78`\ Se   | :sup:`80`\ Se   | :sup:`82`\ Se   | :sup:`81`\ Br   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`80`\ Kr   | :sup:`82`\ Kr   | :sup:`84`\ Kr   | :sup:`85`\ Kr   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`86`\ Kr   | :sup:`85`\ Rb   | :sup:`86`\ Rb   | :sup:`87`\ Rb   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`84`\ Sr   | :sup:`86`\ Sr   | :sup:`87`\ Sr   | :sup:`88`\ Sr   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`89`\ Sr   | :sup:`90`\ Sr   | :sup:`89`\ Y    | :sup:`90`\ Y    |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`91`\ Y    | :sup:`90`\ Zr   | :sup:`92`\ Zr   | :sup:`92`\ Mo   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`94`\ Mo   | :sup:`96`\ Mo   | :sup:`94`\ Nb   | :sup:`96`\ Ru   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`98`\ Ru   | :sup:`99`\ Ru   | :sup:`100`\ Ru  | :sup:`105`\ Ru  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`102`\ Pd  | :sup:`104`\ Pd  | :sup:`106`\ Pd  | :sup:`110`\ Pd  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`107`\ Ag  | :sup:`111`\ Ag  | :sup:`106`\ Cd  | :sup:`108`\ Cd  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`110`\ Cd  | :sup:`111`\ Cd  | :sup:`112`\ Cd  | :sup:`114`\ Cd  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`115m`\ Cd | :sup:`116`\ Cd  | :sup:`140`\ Ce  | :sup:`113`\ In  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`140`\ La  | :sup:`112`\ Sn  | :sup:`114`\ Sn  | :sup:`115`\ Sn  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`116`\ Sn  | :sup:`117`\ Sn  | :sup:`118`\ Sn  | :sup:`119`\ Sn  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`120`\ Sn  | :sup:`122`\ Sn  | :sup:`123`\ Sn  | :sup:`124`\ Sn  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`125`\ Sn  | :sup:`121`\ Sb  | :sup:`123`\ Sb  | :sup:`124`\ Sb  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`125`\ Sb  | :sup:`126`\ Sb  | :sup:`120`\ Te  | :sup:`122`\ Te  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`123`\ Te  | :sup:`124`\ Te  | :sup:`125`\ Te  | :sup:`126`\ Te  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`127m`\ Te | :sup:`128`\ Te  | :sup:`129m`\ Te | :sup:`130`\ Te  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`132`\ Te  | :sup:`130`\ I   | :sup:`131`\ I   | :sup:`124`\ Xe  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`126`\ Xe  | :sup:`128`\ Xe  | :sup:`129`\ Xe  | :sup:`130`\ Xe  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`132`\ Xe  | :sup:`134`\ Xe  | :sup:`136`\ Xe  | :sup:`134`\ Ba  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`135`\ Ba  | :sup:`136`\ Ba  | :sup:`137`\ Ba  | :sup:`138`\ Ba  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`136`\ Cs  | :sup:`142`\ Pr  | :sup:`142`\ Nd  | :sup:`150`\ Nd  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`151`\ Pm  | :sup:`144`\ Sm  | :sup:`148`\ Sm  | :sup:`154`\ Sm  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`152`\ Eu  | :sup:`157`\ Eu  | :sup:`232`\ U   | :sup:`233`\ U   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`159`\ Tb  | :sup:`160`\ Tb  | :sup:`160`\ Dy  | :sup:`161`\ Dy  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`162`\ Dy  | :sup:`163`\ Dy  | :sup:`164`\ Dy  | :sup:`165`\ Ho  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`166`\ Er  | :sup:`167`\ Er  | :sup:`175`\ Lu  | :sup:`176`\ Lu  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`181`\ Ta  | :sup:`182`\ W   | :sup:`183`\ W   | :sup:`184`\ W   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`186`\ W   | :sup:`185`\ Re  | :sup:`187`\ Re  | :sup:`197`\ Au  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`231`\ Pa  | :sup:`233`\ Pa  | :sup:`230`\ Th  | :sup:`232`\ Th  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | \*136                             |                 |                 |
  | additional                        |                 |                 |
  | nuclides in                       |                 |                 |
  | addition to the                   |                 |                 |
  | 15 nuclides in                    |                 |                 |
  | :numref:`tab3-1-3`, 49            |                 |                 |
  | nuclides in                       |                 |                 |
  | :numref:`tab3-1-4`,               |                 |                 |
  | and 31 nuclides                   |                 |                 |
  | in Table 3.1.5,                   |                 |                 |
  | for a total of                    |                 |                 |
  | 231.                              |                 |                 |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+

.. _tab3-1-7:
.. table:: Additional nuclides added in trace quantities for *parm=(addnux=4)* (continued in the following table).
  :align: center

  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`2`\ H     | :sup:`3`\ H     | :sup:`3`\ He    | :sup:`4`\ He    |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`6`\ Li    | :sup:`7`\ Li    | :sup:`7`\ Be    | :sup:`9`\ Be    |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`15`\ N    | :sup:`17`\ O    | :sup:`19`\ F    | :sup:`23`\ Na   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`24`\ Mg   | :sup:`25`\ Mg   | :sup:`26`\ Mg   | :sup:`27`\ Al   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`28`\ Si   | :sup:`29`\ Si   | :sup:`30`\ Si   | :sup:`31`\ P    |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`32`\ S    | :sup:`33`\ S    | :sup:`34`\ S    | :sup:`36`\ S    |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`35`\ Cl   | :sup:`37`\ Cl   | :sup:`36`\ Ar   | :sup:`38`\ Ar   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`40`\ Ar   | :sup:`39`\ K    | :sup:`40`\ K    | :sup:`41`\ K    |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`40`\ Ca   | :sup:`42`\ Ca   | :sup:`43`\ Ca   | :sup:`44`\ Ca   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`46`\ Ca   | :sup:`48`\ Ca   | :sup:`45`\ Sc   | :sup:`46`\ Ti   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`47`\ Ti   | :sup:`48`\ Ti   | :sup:`49`\ Ti   | :sup:`50`\ Ti   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`50`\ Cr   | :sup:`52`\ Cr   | :sup:`53`\ Cr   | :sup:`54`\ Cr   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`55`\ Mn   | :sup:`54`\ Fe   | :sup:`56`\ Fe   | :sup:`57`\ Fe   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`58`\ Fe   | :sup:`58`\ Co   | :sup:`58m`\ Co  | :sup:`59`\ Co   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`58`\ Ni   | :sup:`59`\ Ni   | :sup:`60`\ Ni   | :sup:`61`\ Ni   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`62`\ Ni   | :sup:`64`\ Ni   | :sup:`63`\ Cu   | :sup:`65`\ Cu   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`70`\ Ge   | :sup:`69`\ Ga   | :sup:`71`\ Ga   | :sup:`74`\ As   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`74`\ Se   | :sup:`79`\ Se   | :sup:`78`\ Kr   | :sup:`110m`\ Ag |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`113`\ Sn  | :sup:`123`\ Xe  | :sup:`130`\ Ba  | :sup:`132`\ Ba  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`133`\ Ba  | :sup:`136`\ Ce  | :sup:`138`\ Ce  | :sup:`139`\ Ce  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`138`\ La  | :sup:`148m`\ Pm | :sup:`153`\ Gd  | :sup:`156`\ Dy  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`158`\ Dy  | :sup:`166m`\ Ho | :sup:`162`\ Er  | :sup:`164`\ Er  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+

.. table::
  :align: center

  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`168`\ Er  | :sup:`170`\ Er  | :sup:`174`\ Hf  | :sup:`176`\ Hf  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`177`\ Hf  | :sup:`178`\ Hf  | :sup:`179`\ Hf  | :sup:`180`\ Hf  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`182`\ Ta  | :sup:`191`\ Ir  | :sup:`193`\ Ir  | :sup:`196`\ Hg  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`198`\ Hg  | :sup:`199`\ Hg  | :sup:`200`\ Hg  | :sup:`201`\ Hg  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`202`\ Hg  | :sup:`204`\ Hg  | :sup:`204`\ Pb  | :sup:`206`\ Pb  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`207`\ Pb  | :sup:`208`\ Pb  | :sup:`209`\ Bi  | :sup:`223`\ Ra  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`224`\ Ra  | :sup:`225`\ Ra  | :sup:`225`\ Ac  | :sup:`226`\ Ac  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`227`\ Ac  | :sup:`226`\ Ra  | :sup:`227`\ Th  | :sup:`228`\ Th  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`229`\ Th  | :sup:`233`\ Th  | :sup:`234`\ Th  | :sup:`232`\ Pa  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`235`\ Np  | :sup:`236`\ Np  | :sup:`238`\ Np  | :sup:`239`\ Np  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`237`\ U   | :sup:`239`\ U   | :sup:`240`\ U   | :sup:`241`\ U   |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`236`\ Pu  | :sup:`237`\ Pu  | :sup:`243`\ Pu  | :sup:`244`\ Pu  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`246`\ Pu  | :sup:`244`\ Am  | :sup:`244m`\ Am | :sup:`241`\ Cm  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`245`\ Cm  | :sup:`246`\ Cm  | :sup:`247`\ Cm  | :sup:`248`\ Cm  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`249`\ Cm  | :sup:`250`\ Cm  | :sup:`249`\ Bk  | :sup:`250`\ Bk  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`249`\ Cf  | :sup:`250`\ Cf  | :sup:`251`\ Cf  | :sup:`252`\ Cf  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`253`\ Cf  | :sup:`254`\ Cf  | :sup:`253`\ Es  | :sup:`254`\ Es  |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | :sup:`255`\ Es  |                 |                 |                 |
  +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
  | \*158                             |                 |                 |
  | additional                        |                 |                 |
  | nuclides in                       |                 |                 |
  | addition to the                   |                 |                 |
  | 15 nuclides in                    |                 |                 |
  | :numref:`tab3-1-3`, 49            |                 |                 |
  | nuclides in                       |                 |                 |
  | :numref:`tab3-1-4`, 30            |                 |                 |
  | nuclides in                       |                 |                 |
  | :numref:`tab3-1-5`,               |                 |                 |
  | and 136                           |                 |                 |
  | nuclides in                       |                 |                 |
  | :numref:`tab3-1-6`,               |                 |                 |
  | for a total of                    |                 |                 |
  | 388.                              |                 |                 |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+

.. _3-1-3-7-5:

Few-group reaction cross section calculation control for continuous energy depletion: *parm=(cxm=N)*
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In continuous energy depletion calculations, few group reaction cross
sections are computed by KENO directly rather than using a
post-processing approach that TRITON uses for multigroup mode. In
addition to these region averaged multigroup reaction cross sections,
KENO also provides problem-dependent region-averaged multigroup fluxes
to TRITON that will be used by COUPLE to generate one-group cross
section library for each depletion material.

Option *parm=(cxm=N)* is used to setup continuous-energy depletion
calculation with different modes of calculation, which tells KENO the
details of the tallying process for the reaction cross sections and
mixture fluxes. Available calculations modes and their descriptions are
presented in :numref:`tab3-1-8`.

.. _tab3-1-8:
.. list-table:: cxm values and their descriptions.
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/TRITON/tab8.svg
        :width: 800

..

   :sup:`1` Energy group structure in KENO and associated number of
   energy groups, NGP, should be consistent with those from the ORIGEN
   library used in the problem.

   :sup:`2` cxm=2 is the default mode for reaction cross section
   calculations.

.. _3-1-3-7-6:

Infinite dilution cutoff control: *parm=(infdcutoff=X)*
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The addition of nuclides to depletion materials as described in the
previous section can lead to increased run-times for CENTRM-based XSProc
calculations. However, many nuclides (e.g., low-density nuclides) are
effectively infinitely dilute and can be treated as such and omitted
from the expensive point-wise cross section collapse operation. For the
option *parm=(infdcutoff=sigma0)* sequence option, XSProc will compute
an effective background microscopic cross section for each nuclide. If
the computed background cross section is greater than the cutoff value
*sigma0*, recommended as 5 × 10\ :sup:`5` \ barns, then the nuclide is
considered infinitely dilute and the infinitely dilute multigroup cross
section is utilized from the cross section library.

In general, a *sigma0* cutoff value of 5 × 10\ :sup:`5` barns will be
acceptable for most applications. However, TRITON and the centrmdata
card in the *CELLDATA* block provide a means for the user to control the
cutoff value. The cutoff value may be assigned in either of two ways. A
single global value may be assigned to all cells using the TRITON
*parm=* specifier with the keyword *infdcutoff*, for example,
*parm=(infdcutoff=1e10)*. Addition of the specifier with a value of
1 × 10\ :sup:`10` will set the cutoff value to 1 × 10\ :sup:`10` for all
cells in the problem, which is generally appropriate for most
calculations. However, a provision is made to specify a unique cutoff
value to each cell using the *pmc_dilute* keyword in a *centrmdata*
specification. An example of this is shown in the description of
*parm=xslevel* in :ref:`3-1-3-7-2`.

The default value of *sigma0* depends on the sequence and cross section
processing option. For nondepletion sequences that use *parm=centrm*,
the default is 0. The default value of 0 instructs PMC to include all
nuclides for PMC processing. For depletion sequences that use
*parm=centrm* or for any sequence that uses *parm=2region*, the default
value is 5 × 10\ :sup:`5` barns.

.. _3-1-3-7-7:

Override of the maximum number of days per depletion subinterval: *PARM=(MAXDAYS=N)*
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

TRITON is set to limit ORIGEN time intervals to no more than 40 days to
avoid potential numerical error that would be introduced if depletion
were performed over a long time interval. For depletion subintervals of
more than 400 days (10 time intervals of 40 days), TRITON will
automatically increase the number of depletion subintervals in a
depletion interval. The depletion subinterval is based on a rule of
thumb for ORIGEN depletion. However, the rule breaks down when burning
at very low powers for extended time intervals. Thus, TRITON allows the
user to override the default behavior by specifying a new value for the
maximum number of days per ORIGEN time interval. A 100-day limit per
ORIGEN time interval may be set using *parm=(maxdays=100)*. In
overriding the default behavior, the user must be aware of any potential
errors introduced in the approximation.

.. _3-1-4:

Output Files Ccreated by TRITON
-------------------------------

TRITON produces a variety of output files that may be of use in related
calculations. Of those files, only certain files are copied back to the
return directory: the TRITON output file (.out); plot files generated by
NEWT, KENO, or OPUS (.plt); SAMS sensitivity data files (.sdf), in the
case of an S/U calculation; ORIGEN binary concentration files (.f71) and
HTML-formatted output (.html), where available. The TRITON output file
is a concatenated listing of outputs from TRITON and all modules for
which output is kept. Other files of potential interest are not copied,
and the user should be aware of these files and their names so that they
may be retrieved using a SHELL script after TRITON execution is
complete. The following subsections list those files and their purposes.

.. _3-1-4-1:

Standard composition restart files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At the end of all depletion calculations, standard composition files are
automatically produced for each material, listing the nuclides and
number densities of the materials at the time the transport calculation
(i.e., XSDRN, NEWT, KENO) is performed. Only nuclides for which cross
section data are available in the master cross section library are saved
in these files. Files are saved using the file naming convention
StdCmpMix\ *NNNNN*, where *NNNNN* is the material identifier. The file
contains compositions at the final time of the calculation. Additional
files are saved with the file naming convention
StdCmpMix\ *NNNNN_MMMMM*, where *MMMMM* is an index to a particular time
step in the depletion calculation. For example, if a calculation is
completed with materials 1 and 40 for two depletion steps, then the
following files will be created in the temporary working directory.

.. code:: none

  StdCmpMix00001_00000 (t=0)
  StdCmpMix00001_00001 (midpoint of 1st depletion step)
  StdCmpMix00001_00002 (midpoint of 2nd depletion step)
  StdCmpMix00001_00003 (final compositions, end of 2nd depletion step)
  StdCmpMix00001 (same as StdCmpMix00001_00003)
  StdCmpMix00040_00000 (t=0)
  StdCmpMix00040_00001 (midpoint of 1st depletion step)
  StdCmpMix00040_00002 (midpoint of 2nd depletion step)
  StdCmpMix00040_00003 (final compositions, end of 2nd depletion step)
  StdCmpMix00040 (same as StdCmpMix00040_00003)

The contents of these files will be a standard composition description
of each material by atomic contents—that is, SCALE standard nuclide IDs
(e.g., U-235), number density, and temperature (using the temperature of
the original material). Using SCALE’s external file read capability,
these outputs may be automatically included in a follow-on calculation
that relies on depleted/decayed number densities. TRITON sample problem
7 (:ref:`3-1-6-7`) provides an example of the use of these restart files.

.. important:: Standard composition restart files should be used only for follow-on
  criticality or shielding calculations.

.. _3-1-4-2:

Lattice physics parameters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

During T-DEPL depletion calculations that use branch states and
homogenization, a database of few-group cross sections is saved for each
branch state and at each depletion step containing homogenized cross
section data and other lattice physics parameters (e.g., discontinuity
factors, pin power peaking factors, diffusion coefficients, etc.). The
*xfile016* file is intended for post-processing, to be read and written
in the desired format for subsequent nodal diffusion core simulator
calculations. The *xfile016* file is a binary-formatted file, which is
described in detail in Appendix A of TRITON. An auxiliary text-formatted
database file (*txtfile16*) is also created that contains the same data
as the binary-formatted file.

.. _3-1-4-3:

ORIGEN binary library files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

During depletion calculations, ORIGEN binary library files are created
to archive cross sections for each depletion material at each depletion
subinterval. These files can be used in future depletion calculations in
ORIGEN, ORIGAMI, and ARP. For each depletion material, the ORIGEN binary
library file is named *ft33f001.mix*\ NNNN, where *NNNN* is the material
number for each depleted material. Additionally, the combined cross
section file is saved with the name *ft33f001.cmbined*. Here is an
example of a script to retrieve cross section files.

POSIX:

::

  =shell
     cp ft33f001.mix0001 ${OUTDIR}/pwr_mix01.arp
     cp ft33f001.cmbined ${OUTDIR}/pwr_asmb.arp
  end


Windows:

::

  =shell
     copy ft33f001.mix0001 %OUTDIR%\pwr_mix01.arp
     copy ft33f001.cmbined %OUTDIR%\pwr_asmb.arp
  end

.. _3-1-4-4:

ORIGEN binary concentration file (.f71)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

During depletion calculations, TRITON creates the ORIGEN binary
concentration file (.f71). This file is created in the temporary
directory as *ft71f001* and is copied back at the end of the SCALE
calculation to the return directory with the name ${OUTBASENAME}.f71.
TRITON archives computed concentrations for each depletion material at
the beginning and end of each depletion subinterval or decay interval.
These files include concentrations and also decay heat term, photon and
neutron data, and other quantities or interest computed by ORIGEN. These
data may be post-processed by the OPUS module.

The .f71 file contains concentrations for each individual material, and
it also contains the combined concentrations of the individual material
results (i.e., the net response for the entire system). The TRITON
output contains an index of the contents of this file (see
:ref:`3-1-5-4-5`).

.. _3-1-5:

Output Description
------------------

This section contains a brief description and explanation of TRITON
output. As with any SCALE module, TRITON output begins with the SCALE
header, the job information, the input file, and the program
verification information. These outputs are common to all SCALE modules.
Likewise, all SCALE calculations report a run-time summary at the end of
the output file.

.. _3-1-5-1:

Control parameter edit
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When TRITON control parameters are specified using the parm= command
(see :ref:`3-1-3-7`), all specified parameters are echoed following the
above output, with an explanation of the meaning of the parameter, as
shown below. If no parameters are specified, no edit is provided.

.. code:: none

  The following TRITON control parameters were requested:

     WEIGHT - Weighted collapsed master library
              option selected for t-newt calculation, based
              on system-averaged flux.
     ADDNUX - specifies the set of additional nuclides added
              in trace quantities for depletion
              calculations. Set 1 was selected.
              See TRITON manual for more information.

.. _3-1-5-2:

T-XSEC output
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The T-XSEC sequence performs only cross section processing functions.
The XSProc output is written to the output file as the calculation
proceeds.

.. _3-1-5-3:

T-NEWT and T-XSDRN output
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default, the T-NEWT and T-XSDRN outputs include only the NEWT and
XSDRN output respectively. The XSProc output can be included by using
the *KEEP_OUTPUT* block (see :ref:`3-1-3-6`).

.. _3-1-5-4:

Depletion sequence output
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The output of TRITON depletion sequences contains several depletion
edits. The edits are described in the following subsections. These
output edits are written to the output file in the order in which they
are computed during the calculation.

.. _3-1-5-4-1:

Burnup history summary (all depletion sequences)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

TRITON generates the burnup history summary table after processing the
*BURNDATA* block. An example of this table is as follows.

.. list-table::
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/TRITON/tab3-1-5-4-1.svg
        :width: 700


This table shows the results of a burnup history using one depletion
interval with seven depletion subintervals. Column 1 is the cumulative
depletion subinterval number. Column 2 is the depletion interval number,
and column 3 is the depletion subinterval number within the current
depletion interval. Columns 4–6 echo the specific power, depletion
interval, and decay interval specified in the *BURNDATA* block. The
final column shows the cumulative burnup at the midpoint of each
depletion subinterval.

.. _3-1-5-4-2:

Embedded transport model output
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The output from the initial transport calculation follows the burnup
history edit. The output edits for NEWT, XSDRN, KENO-V.a, and KENO-VI
are described in their respective manual sections.

.. _3-1-5-4-3:

System mass balance table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

After the initial transport calculation output, a summary of system mass
information is printed, an example of which is provided as follows.

.. list-table::
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/TRITON/tab3-1-5-4-3.svg
        :width: 800

This table provides mass and density data for each material used in the
transport model. Column 1 provides the material identifier, and columns
5 and 6 provide the material density and material heavy metal density,
respectively, in units of grams per cubic centimeter. Heavy metal mass
is determined from masses of all nuclides with an atomic number greater
than 89. The final column provides the depletion mode for each material
(see :ref:`3-1-3-3-4-2`). Column 2 provides the “prenormalized” heavy
metal mass of each material. The units for this mass value depend on the
transport model. For 2D *xy* NEWT models, the units are grams per
centimeter since there is no *z-* dimension in the model. Similarly, the
units are grams per centimeter for 1D cylinder XSDRN models, grams per
square centimeter for 1D slab XSDRN models, and grams for 1D spherical
XSDRN models and 3D KENO models. The total prenormalized heavy metal
mass is printed in the final row of the table as well as in the table
header (highlighted in red). The heavy metal mass is normalized such
that a total system mass of 1 MTHM is present. The volume scaling factor
used to normalize the system mass is also printed in the table banner
(highlighted in red). The units of the volume scaling factor depend on
the transport model. Column 3 prints the normalized material heavy metal
mass in units of grams, which is equal to the prenormalized material
heavy metal mass in column 2 multiplied by the volume scaling factor in
the table header. The total normalized mass is printed in the final row
and also in the table header (highlighted in red). The fourth column
shows the fractional heavy metal mass of all materials, which is equal
to the normalized heavy metal mass in column 3, divided by the total
normalized system heavy metal mass in the table header.

.. _3-1-5-4-4:

Power balance tables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As the TRITON calculation proceeds, the results of the cross section
processing and transport calculations are used to calculate fluxes and
powers in each material. The output segment listed below shows the
results for the first calculation based on the initial material
compositions. The total power (column 2) represents the
material-specific power in units of MW/MTHM of initial **system** mass.
The fractional power (column 3) is equal to the total power for a
material divided by the total system power (highlighted in red). The
mixture power (column 4) represents material-specific power in units of
MW/MTHM of initial **material** mass. The mixture power is equal to the
total power of the material divided by the fractional heavy metal mass
of the material, which is provided in the system mass balance table
(:ref:`3-1-5-4-3`). If the material does not contain heavy metal, then
“N/A” is printed in the mixture power column. Columns 5 and 6 show the
material thermal and total flux values, respectively, in units of
neutrons/cm\ :sup:`2`-sec. The thermal flux is determined by integrating
multigroup flux values for energy groups below 0.625 eV. If the specific
power is normalized to the total system power, the summation of the
material powers in column 1 should match the input specification in the
*BURNDATA* block (in the example given here, 20.86 MW/MTHM).

.. list-table::
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/TRITON/tab3-1-5-4-4.svg
        :width: 800

The form of the output changes if the specific power is normalized to
the power to one or more specific materials. For the case above, if
depletion was performed with input power normalized to material 7, the
power output table would have the following form.

.. list-table::
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/TRITON/tab3-1-5-4-4(2).svg
        :width: 800

In this example, material 7 has the input-specified power (20.86
MW/MTHM, highlighted in red), and the power in the remainder of the
model materials is normalized according to this basis material.

.. _3-1-5-4-5:

ORIGEN binary concentration file listing
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

After all depletion calculations are completed, TRITON creates an ORIGEN
binary concentration file (.f71) with isotopic concentrations for each
depletion material. The order and content of the .f71 file is provided
in the TRITON output. An example of this edit is shown below. For each
depletion material, the output gives the location in the file, the
ORIGEN time interval number, the depletion interval time in days, the
cumulative time in years, and a title. After all materials are added to
the library, the system average of all libraries is computed and added
to the library. In this case, with only one depletion material, the
system average would be the same as the single material.

.. code:: none

  *** Depletion calculations completed. Processing ORIGEN libraries. ***

      49 time dumps found on this set of libraries.
      File ft71f001 contains origen/opus-formatted binary data for 49 time dumps
      from each of 1 depletion materials, plus a final set for the sum of all
      depletion materials.  Isotopic data locations are listed according to the following table.
      (Note that there are two data records present for each time step.)
      Position  Time Step  Cycle Time (d)  Cumulative Time (y)  Case Name
          1          1       0.0000E+00      0.0000E+00    Pass no. 1 First depletion calculation, mix no.   1
          2          2       3.8273E+01      1.0479E-01
          3          3       7.6545E+01      2.0957E-01
          4          4       1.1482E+02      3.1436E-01
  ...
         12         12       4.2100E+02      1.1526E+00
         13         13       1.1111E+00      1.1557E+00    Pass no. 1 Decay calculation, mix no.   1
         14         14       3.3333E+00      1.1618E+00
         15         15       1.0000E+01      1.1800E+00
         16         16       3.0000E+01      1.2348E+00
         17         17       3.8273E+01      1.3396E+00    Pass no. 2 First depletion calculation, mix no.   1
  ...
         27         27       4.2100E+02      2.3874E+00
         28         28       1.1111E+00      2.3904E+00    Pass no. 2 Decay calculation, mix no.   1
         29         29       3.3333E+00      2.3965E+00
         30         30       1.0000E+01      2.4148E+00
         31         31       3.0000E+01      2.4695E+00
         32         32       3.8273E+01      2.5743E+00    Pass no. 3 First depletion calculation, mix no.   1
         33         33       7.6545E+01      2.6791E+00
  ...
         42         42       4.2100E+02      3.6222E+00
         43         43       2.5050E+00      3.6290E+00    Pass no. 3 Decay calculation, mix no.   1
  ...
         50          1       0.0000E+00      0.0000E+00    Weighted sum of concentrations of all depleted mat
         51          2       3.8273E+01      1.0479E-01
  ...
         96         47       2.0292E+02      4.1777E+00
         97         48       6.0875E+02      5.2888E+00
         98         49       1.8262E+03      8.6222E+00

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The requested OPUS output edits follow the .f71 file summary edit.

.. _3-1-5-5:

TSUNAMI-2D output
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Output from the TSUNAMI-2D and TSUNAMI-2DC sequence is similar to that
of the T-NEWT sequence, with the addition of the SAMS module output. If
the user requests sensitivity and uncertainty analysis for
non-\ *k*\ :sub:`eff` responses via the *DEFINITIONS* and *SYSTEMRESPONSES*
blocks, the TRITON output will edit out the computed values of these
responses. An example of this is shown here for sample problem 9 in
:ref:`3-1-6-9`.

::

  Computed Response Ratio value for 'U235-abs' is:   1.428612E+01

  Computed Response Ratio value for 'U235-fis' is:   1.155715E+01

  Computed Response Ratio value for 'U238-abs' is:   3.036017E-01

  Computed Response Ratio value for 'U238-fis' is:   3.393816E-02


In addition to the text-formatted output, TRITON generates
HTML-formatted output for TSUNAMI-2D calculations. The HTML output is
fully described in the SAMS chapter.

.. _3-1-6:

TRITON Sample Cases
-------------------

This section provides descriptions of the 13 TRITON sample problems
included with SCALE. Note that all of these problems (along with all
other SCALE sample problems) are typically executed in the initial SCALE
installation to test the performance of various codes and options, for
validation of the installation process. Because of the number of
problems that are executed, these sample problems are adjusted to run as
fast as possible so that all test problems may be completed in
relatively short order. To accomplish this, crude modeling
approximations (reduced convergence, few histories, simplified cross
section processing, low-order quadrature and scattering approximations,
coarse computational grids, reduced numbers of libraries per depletion
cycle, etc.) may be used. Hence, although these problems provide
guidance in setting up and executing TRITON problems, it is generally a
good idea to review all control settings to ensure sufficient accuracy
in one’s own calculations.

Additional TRITON input files for several reactor types can be generated
with the SCALE/ORIGEN Library Generator (SLIG). The SLIB documentation
is available as Appendix B of the ORIGEN chapter.

.. _3-1-6-1:

TRITON sample problem 1: triton1.inp
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sample problem triton1.inp is an example of a T-NEWT transport
calculation sequence. Input begins (as with all SCALE sequences) with a
title card and cross section library specification; this calculation is
performed using the 252-group ENDF/B-7.1 library. After the library
specification, three materials are defined in the composition block,
followed by a cell specification and the NEWT transport model.

This example includes an axial height of 37.1 cm and will therefore do a
buckled calculation based on this height. The geometric model consists
of a simple pin cell, with cylindrical fuel and clad regions inside a
square moderator region, with a 6 × 6 base grid. The NEWT *BOUNDS* block
specifies that periodic boundary conditions are used for this model.

This simple problem also demonstrates the use of TRITON’s automatic
cross section collapse capability—\ *parm=weight*. For *T-NEWT*
calculations, TRITON uses the NEWT *COLLAPSE* block to define the
broad-group energy structure. For this sample problem, the cross
sections are collapsed to a 56‑group format. The new broad-group library
will be identified as filename *newxnlib* in the temporary working
directory, which can be used in follow-up SCALE calculations.

..

::

  ' THIS SAMPLE PROBLEM TEST THE FOLLOWING:
  '  ** t-newt sequence
  '  ** v7-252 group library
  '  ** centrm cross section processing (default for t-newt calculations)
  '  ** parm=weight option for the t-newt sequence, which uses the NEWT collapse block to specify a 252 -> 56 group collapse.
  '  ** latticecell cross section processing option
  =t-newt        parm=weight
  Buckled pin-cell transport calculation
  v7-252
  read comp
    u-234 1 0 6.74213e-6 296.15 end
    u-235 1 0 7.65322e-4 296.15 end
    u-236 1 0 3.68820e-6 296.15 end
    u-238 1 0 2.20912e-2 296.15 end
    o     1 0 4.57338e-2 296.15 end
    b-10  1 0 3.64042e-9 296.15 end
    b-11  1 0 1.46531e-8 296.15 end
    cr    25 0 6.67242e-5 296.15 end
    fe    25 0 1.25922e-4 296.15 end
    sn    25 0 4.17642e-4 296.15 end
    o     25 0 2.63724e-4 296.15 end
    zr    25 0 3.78392e-2 296.15 end
    h     26 0 6.68559e-2 296.15 end
    o     26 0 3.34279e-2 296.15 end
  end comp
  read celldata
    latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.2600 26 fuelr=0.4095 1 cladr=0.4750 25 end
  end celldata
  read model
  238 group solution
  read parm
    dz=37.1
  end parm
  read materials
    mix=1  com="3.0 enriched fuel, pin location 1" end
    mix=25 com="cladding" end
    mix=26 com="water" end
  end materials
  read geom
    global unit 1
      cylinder 10 0.4095
      cylinder 20 0.4750
      cuboid   30 4p0.63
      media  1 1 10
      media 25 1 20 -10
      media 26 1 30 -20
    boundary 30 6 6
  end geom
  read collapse
    8r1 2r2 3 3r4 5 5r6 6r7 2r8 3r9 4r10 4r11 12 13 10r14 3r15 16 6r17
    3r18 18r19 2r20 6r21 22 3r23 24 7r25 26 16r27 2r28 11r29 30 31 14r32
    33 2r34 35 3r36 35r37 5r38 7r39 11r40 4r41 2r42 43 44 3r45 2r46 2r47 2r48
    2r49 2r50 51 52 2r53 54 3r55 10r56

  '  OLD 238G collapse to 49G
  '  7r1 2 3 2r4 5 6 7 8 8 8r9 14r10 6r11 10r12 13 7r14 11r15 12r16 30r17 16r18 2r19
  '  6r20 3r21 6r22 14r23 3r24 5r25 4r26 5r27 5r28 5r29 10r30 5r31 32 33 34 2r35
  '  36 37 38 2r39 2r40 3r41 2r42 43 44 45 46 47 3r48 9r49 end collapse
  read bounds
  all=periodic
  end bounds
  end model
  end

.. _3-1-6-2:

TRITON sample problem 2: triton2.inp
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sample problem triton2.inp is an example of a T-XSDRN transport
calculation sequence. In this case, the parameter specification
*parm=2region* instructs TRITON to perform cross section processing
using the CENTRM-based two-region option in place of the default
CENTRM-based S\ :sub:`N` option (see :ref:`3-1-2-1`). As in sample
problem 1, a simple square-pitched pin cell is modeled but in this case
using an XSDRN model block rather than the NEWT model block. The
moderator radius was defined in order to preserve the volume of the
moderator region.

::

  ' THIS SAMPLE PROBLEM TEST THE FOLLOWING:
  '  ** t-xsdrn sequence
  '  ** v7-238 group library
  '  ** 2region cross section processing
  '  ** latticecell cross section processing option
  =t-xsdrn           parm=2region
  pin-cell model with MOX
  v7-238
  read comp
  ' Fuel
    u-234 1 0  2.5952E-7 900  end
    pu-238 1 0 4.6610E-5 900  end
    pu-241 1 0 1.7491E-4 900  end
    pu-242 1 0 1.3201E-4 900  end
    o-16  1 0  4.6586E-2 900  end
    pu-240 1 0 4.8255E-4 900  end
    pu-239 1 0 1.0156E-3 900  end
    u-235 1 0  5.4287E-5 900  end
    u-238 1 0  2.1387E-2 900  end
  ' zirc
    zr-90 2 0 3.8657E-2 620 end
    fe    2 0 1.3345E-4 620 end
    cr    2 0 6.8254E-5 620 end
  ' h2o
    h-1  3 0 4.8414E-2 575  end
    o-16 3 0 2.4213E-2 575  end
    b-10 3 0 4.7896E-6 575  end
    b-11 3 0 1.9424E-5 575  end
  end comp
  read cell
    latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.3127 3 fueld=0.8200 1 cladd=0.9500 2 end
  end cell
  read model
  pin-cell model with MOX
  read parm
    sn=16
  end parm
  read materials
    mix=1 com='fuel' end
    mix=2 com='clad' end
    mix=3 com='moderator' end
  end materials
  read geom
    geom=cylinder
    rightBC=white
    zoneIDs 1 2 3 end zoneids
    zoneDimensions 0.41 0.475 0.7406117 end zoneDimensions
    zoneIntervals 3r10 end zoneIntervals
  end geom
  end model
  end

.. _3-1-6-3:

TRITON sample problem 3: triton3.inp
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sample problem 3 illustrates the input format for a T-DEPL-1D depletion
calculation. In this case, a single square-pitched pin-cell model is
depleted, where the fuel composition is comprised of UO\ :sub:`2` fuel
homogenized with aluminum and B\ :sub:`4`\ C. Although this is not
representative of real fuel, it does allow one to observe the effect of
boron depletion during burnup; results will show an increasing
multiplication factor as boron is depleted, followed by a decreasing
eigenvalue after the fuel depletion becomes the dominant contributor to
reactivity change. Three depletion intervals are specified with the same
power and no decay intervals. Two depletion subintervals are specified
for the first two depletion intervals, with only one depletion
subinterval for the final depletion interval. Note that this may be
insufficient to capture the effect of boron depletion early in life;
fewer depletion subintervals are used here only to reduce the run-time
for this sample problem. In this model, power is normalized such that
material 1 has a power density of 21.22 MW/MTHM (or MT/MTU for
UO\ :sub:`2` fuel), and OPUS output is requested for 35 nuclides. The
problem is run using the addnux=3 option set to add trace quantities of
231 nuclides to depletion materials.

..

::

  ' THIS SAMPLE PROBLEM TEST THE FOLLOWING:
  '  ** t-depl-1d sequence
  '  ** v7-238 group library
  '  ** Sn centrm cross section processing (default for t-depl-1d calculations)
  '  ** latticecell cross section processing option
  '  ** parm=addnux=3 option to add 231 nuclides to fuel material
  '  ** deplete-by-constant power
  '  ** mixture power normalization
  '  ** opus block
  =t-depl-1d        parm=(addnux=3)
  Infinite lattice depletion model for a single pincell.
  v7-238
  read comp
  ' Fuel/AL2O3-B4C
    uo2   1 den=10.045 1 841 92234 0.022 92235 2.453 92236 0.011 92238 97.514 end
    b-10  1  0  8.5900E-4   841.0 end
    b-11  1  0  3.4400E-3   841.0 end
    c     1  0  1.0700E-3   841.0 end
    al    1  0  3.9000E-2   841.0 end
  ' Clad
    wtptzirc 4 6.44 4 40000 97.91 26000 0.5 50116 0.86 50120 0.73 1.0 620  end
  ' Moderator
    h2o  5 den=0.7573  1  557 end
  end comp
  read celldata
    latticecell squarepitch   pitch=1.4732  5 fuelr=0.47250 1 cladr=0.5588  4  end
  end celldata
  read depletion
    -1
  end depletion
  read burndata
    power=21.220 burn=750 down=0 nlib=2 end
    power=21.220 burn=750 down=0 nlib=2 end
    power=21.220 burn=375 down=0 nlib=1 end
  end burndata
  read opus
    units=gram
    symnuc=u-234 u-235 u-236 u-238 pu-238 pu-239
    pu-240 pu-241 pu-242 pu-243 np-237
    cs-133 cs-134 cs-135 cs-137 nd-143 nd-144 nd-145 nd-146
    nd-148 nd-150 pm-147 sm-147 sm-148 sm-149 sm-150 sm-151
    sm-152 eu-153 sm-154 eu-154 gd-154 eu-155 gd-155 o-16 end
    matl=0 1  end
  end opus
  read model
  Infinite-lattice pin model (one-fourth)
  read parm
    sn=16
  end parm
  read materials
    mix=1      com='fuel' end
    mix=4      com='clad' end
    mix=5 pn=2 com='water' end
  end materials
  read geom
    geom=cylinder
    rightBC=white
    zoneIDs 1 4 5 end zoneids
    zoneDimensions 0.47250 0.5588 0.83116409 end zoneDimensions
    zoneIntervals 3r10 end zoneIntervals
  end geom
  end model
  end

.. _3-1-6-4:

TRITON sample problem 4: triton4.inp
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


Sample problem *triton4.inp* performs a large-scale depletion
calculation for a one-fourth PWR assembly, taking advantage of symmetry
to reduce the problem size. The same fuel material is used in each fuel
rod, which will result in assembly-averaged isotopic compositions for
all fuel rods. If one wanted to obtain an isotopic estimate for one or
more unique fuel rod locations, then different materials would be
specified for different rod positions. Even though all fuel is identical
at the beginning of life, unique materials must be specified if one
desires to perform tracking of the unique response of each unique fuel
position.

The problem parameter specification *parm=(weight)* instructs TRITON to
perform an automated cross section library collapse. For library
collapse automation within depletion calculations (see :ref:`3-1-3-7-3`),
TRITON will perform a single 252-group calculation at t = 0 to generate
the 56-group cross section library. TRITON will restart the depletion
calculation at t = 0 using the broad-group library after it is created.
Because *parm=weight* is specified, the *NEWT COLLAPSE* block must
comply with the 56-group energy structure and not the 252-group energy
structure. The *COLLAPSE* block input is slightly different for the
library collapse automation for *T-NEWT* calculations, where the *NEWT
COLLAPSE* block must comply with the 252-group energy structure.

Problem 4 also uses a timetable to specify boron letdown in the
moderator. The initially specified boron concentration in the *COMP* (or
*COMPOSITION*) data block is multiplied by a density multiplier at the
time of each cross section processing and transport calculation (i.e.,
the midpoint of depletion subinterval). Linear interpolation is
performed between values on the timetable to obtain the multiplier for a
given time. Typically a multiplier of 1.0 is used for t = 0, and the
beginning-of-life boron concentration is input in the *COMPOSITION*
block, but this example demonstrates that this is not necessary. For
this calculation, a 500 ppm boron concentration is specified in the
standard composition description, and a concentration of (500
ppm)*(1.832), or 916 ppm, would be used in the t = 0 transport
calculation.

Problem 4 is also an example of a lattice physics calculation for a full
fuel assembly. The NEWT model employs coarse-mesh finite-difference
acceleration, whole-assembly homogenization, 2-energy-group collapse,
and a pin-power print, and computes assembly discontinuity factors.
Although this sample problem will create the cross section database file
for core calculations, this sample problem does not contain branching
calculations, nor do lattice physics calculations typically use boron
letdown curves. Additional guidance for TRITON lattice physics
calculations can be found in the lattice physics primer.

Because only one fuel material is used, only one cell specification is
necessary. If multiple fuel materials were used, then a corresponding
cell specification would be required for each fuel, with a unique clad
and moderator material identifier for each cell. To apply boron letdown
properly, the moderator present in each cell specification would need to
have the same letdown curve specified. Hence, a letdown timetable would
need to be specified for each moderator (even if the moderators are not
all used in the NEWT *model* block). If multiple fuel materials are
used, requiring corresponding multiple clad, moderation, cell, and
timetable specifications, the use of an *alias* specification can
simplify input. Aliases are described in :ref:`3-1-3-5`; sample problems
triton6.inp (:ref:`3-1-6-6`), triton8.inp (:ref:`3-1-6-8`), and
triton12.inp (:ref:`3-1-6-12`) demonstrate the use of aliases.

This case also illustrates the use of stacked OPUS cases within a single
TRITON input file. Here, an OPUS calculation is requested to obtain the
mass in grams of 26 actinides and fission products for material 1 and
for the entire system; since material 1 is the entire set of depletion
materials, the system output will be identical to the material 1 output.
A second OPUS calculation is also specified, which requests a ranked
output of the top 20 nuclides in terms of decay heat (in watts).),
TRITON will perform a single 252-group calculation at t = 0 to generate
the 56-group cross section library. TRITON will restart the depletion
calculation at t = 0 using the broad-group library after it is created.
Because *parm=weight* is specified, the *NEWT COLLAPSE* block must
comply with the 56-group energy structure and not the 252-group energy
structure. The *COLLAPSE* block input is slightly different for the
library collapse automation for *T-NEWT* calculations, where the *NEWT
COLLAPSE* block must comply with the 252-group energy structure.

Problem 4 also uses a timetable to specify boron letdown in the
moderator. The initially specified boron concentration in the *COMP* (or
*COMPOSITION*) data block is multiplied by a density multiplier at the
time of each cross section processing and transport calculation (i.e.,
the midpoint of depletion subinterval). Linear interpolation is
performed between values on the timetable to obtain the multiplier for a
given time. Typically a multiplier of 1.0 is used for t = 0, and the
beginning-of-life boron concentration is input in the *COMPOSITION*
block, but this example demonstrates that this is not necessary. For
this calculation, a 500 ppm boron concentration is specified in the
standard composition description, and a concentration of (500
ppm)*(1.832), or 916 ppm, would be used in the t = 0 transport
calculation.

Problem 4 is also an example of a lattice physics calculation for a full
fuel assembly. The NEWT model employs coarse-mesh finite-difference
acceleration, whole-assembly homogenization, 2-energy-group collapse,
and a pin-power print, and computes assembly discontinuity factors.
Although this sample problem will create the cross section database file
for core calculations, this sample problem does not contain branching
calculations, nor do lattice physics calculations typically use boron
letdown curves. Additional guidance for TRITON lattice physics
calculations can be found in the lattice physics primer.

Because only one fuel material is used, only one cell specification is
necessary. If multiple fuel materials were used, then a corresponding
cell specification would be required for each fuel, with a unique clad
and moderator material identifier for each cell. To apply boron letdown
properly, the moderator present in each cell specification would need to
have the same letdown curve specified. Hence, a letdown timetable would
need to be specified for each moderator (even if the moderators are not
all used in the NEWT *model* block). If multiple fuel materials are
used, requiring corresponding multiple clad, moderation, cell, and
timetable specifications, the use of an *alias* specification can
simplify input. Aliases are described in :ref:`3-1-3-5`; sample problems
triton6.inp (:ref:`3-1-6-6`), triton8.inp (:ref:`3-1-6-8`), and
triton12.inp (:ref:`3-1-6-12`) demonstrate the use of aliases.

This case also illustrates the use of stacked OPUS cases within a single
TRITON input file. Here, an OPUS calculation is requested to obtain the
mass in grams of 26 actinides and fission products for material 1 and
for the entire system; since material 1 is the entire set of depletion
materials, the system output will be identical to the material 1 output.
A second OPUS calculation is also specified, which requests a ranked
output of the top 20 nuclides in terms of decay heat (in watts).

::

  ' THIS SAMPLE PROBLEM TEST THE FOLLOWING:
  '  ** t-depl sequence
  '  ** v7-252 group library
  '  ** 2region cross section processing
  '  ** parm=weight option for the t-depl sequence, which uses builtin 49-group collapse
  '  ** latticecell cross section processing option
  '  ** deplete-by-constant power
  '  ** system power normalization
  '  ** timetable block using density multiplier
  '  ** opus block defining multiple plots
  =t-depl      parm=(2region,weight)
  Large scale 2-D depletion model with a boron letdown curve
  v7-252
  read comp
    uo2       1 den=10.412 1 900 92234 0.04 92235 4.11  92238 95.85 end
    wtptzirc 25 6.44 4 40000 97.91 26000 0.5 50116 0.86 50120 0.73 1.0 600 end
    h2o      26 den=0.6798 1 593 end
    wtptbor  26 0.6798 1 5000 100 500e-6 593 end
  end comp
  read celldata
    latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.2600 26 fuelr=0.4025 1 cladr=0.4750 25 end
  end celldata
  read depletion
    1
  end depletion
  read timetable
    densmult 26 2 5010 5011
      0.0    1.832
      106    1.419
      205    1.033
      306    0.641
      385    0.611
      473    1.797
      592    1.371
      704    0.973
      817    0.568
      875    0.362 end
  end timetable

::

  read burndata
    power=37.883 burn=385 down=88  nlib=1 end
    power=32.215 burn=402 down=158 nlib=1 end
  end burndata
  read opus
    units=gram
    symnuc=u-234 u-235 u-236 u-238 pu-238 pu-239
      pu-240 pu-241 pu-242 np-237 am-241 am-243 cm-242 cm-243
      cs-134 cs-137 nd-143 nd-144 nd-145 nd-146 cm-244 cm-245
      cm-246 cm-247 ru-106 am-242m end
    matl=0 1  end
  newcase
    units=watts sort=yes nrank=20 time=years
  end opus
  read model
  One-fourth fuel assembly
  read parm
    drawit=yes cmfd=yes xycmfd=0 echo=yes collapse=yes sn=4 inners=3 outers=200 epsilon=1e-3
  end parm
  read materials
    mix=1  com='4.11 wt % enriched fuel' end
    mix=25 com='cladding' end
    mix=26 com='water' end
  end materials
  read collapse
    40r1 16r2
  end collapse
  read homog
    500 whole_assm 1 25 26 end
  end homog
  read adf
    1 500 n=10.71 e=10.71 end adf
  read geom
  ' unit 25 is a right-half water hole
    unit 25
      cylinder 10 .4500 chord +x=0.0
      cylinder 20 .4950 chord +x=0.0
      cuboid 30 0.63 0.0 0.63 -0.63
      media 26 1 10
      media 25 1 20 -10
      media 26 1 30 -20
    boundary 30 2 4
  ' unit 45 is top-half water hole
    unit 45
      cylinder 10 .4500 chord +y=0.0
      cylinder 20 .4950 chord +y=0.0
      cuboid 30 0.63 -0.63 0.63 0.0
      media 26 1 10
      media 25 1 20 -10
      media 26 1 30 -20
    boundary 30 4 2

::

  ' unit 46 is a 1/4 water hole
    unit 46
      cylinder 10 .4500 chord +x=0 chord +y=0
      cylinder 20 .495 chord +x=0 chord +y=0
      cuboid 30 0.63 0. 0.63 0.
      media 26 1 10
      media 25 1 20 -10
      media 26 1 30 -20
    boundary 30 2 2
  ' unit 1 is a full material #1 rod
    unit 1
      cylinder 10 .4025
      cylinder 20 .4950
      cuboid 30 0.63 -0.63 0.63 -0.63
      media 1 1 10
      media 25 1 20 -10
      media 26 1 30 -20
    boundary 30 4 4
  ' unit 2 is a top-half material #1 rod
    unit 2
      cylinder 10 .4025 chord +y=0
      cylinder 20 .4950 chord +y=0
      cuboid 30 0.63 -0.63 0.63 0.0
      media 1 1 10
      media 25 1 20 -10
      media 26 1 30 -20
    boundary 30 4 2
  ' unit 3 is a right-half material #1 rod
    unit 3
      cylinder 10 .4025 chord +x=0
      cylinder 20 .4950 chord +x=0
      cuboid 30 0.63 0.0 0.63 -0.63
      media 1 1 10
      media 25 1 20 -10
      media 26 1 30 -20
    boundary 30 2 4
    global unit 100
      cuboid 1 10.71 0.0 10.71 0.0
      array 10 1
      media 26 1 1
    boundary 1
  end geom
  read array
    ara=10 nux=9 nuy=9 pinpow=yes typ=cuboidal
    fill 46  2  2 45  2  2 45  2  2
          3  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1
          3  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1
         25  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1
          3  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1
          3  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1
         25  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1
          3  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1
          3  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1 end fill
  end array
  read bounds
    all=refl
  end bounds
  end model
  end

.. _3-1-6-5:

TRITON sample problem 5: triton5.inp
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sample problem *triton5.inp* is similar to *triton4.inp*, except that it
is a T5-DEPL case; thus, a KENO V.a transport model is used in place of
the NEWT model of the earlier case. The KENO V.a model, although 3D, is
axially uniform with reflecting boundary conditions, so it is
effectively the same model as the 2D model of *triton4.inp*. Moreover,
the KENO V.a model represents the full assembly rather than a one-fourth
model. Hence, both cases will generate similar results. In the KENO
model, only 300,000 neutron histories are retained, which is somewhat
low to obtain good statistics on fluxes. The 238 ENDF/B-VII library is
used for this sample problem compared to the 252 ENDF/B-VII.1 library
utilized in *triton4.inp*.

::

  ' THIS SAMPLE PROBLEM TEST THE FOLLOWING:
  '  ** t-depl sequence
  '  ** v7-238 group library
  '  ** 2region cross section processing
  '  ** latticecell cross section processing option
  '  ** deplete-by-constant power
  '  ** system power normalization
  '  ** timetable block using density multiplier
  =t5-depl               parm=2region
  Large scale 2-D depletion model with boron density change.
  V7-238
  read comp
    uo2       1 den=10.412 1 900 92234 0.04 92235 4.11  92238 95.85 end
    wtptzirc 25 6.44 4 40000 97.91 26000 0.5 50116 0.86 50120 0.73 1.0 600 end
    h2o      26 den=0.6798 1 593 end
    wtptbor  26 0.6798 1 5000 100 500e-6 593 end
  end comp
  read celldata
    latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.2600 26 fuelr=0.4025 1 cladr=0.4750 25 end
  end celldata
  read depletion
    1
  end depletion
  read timetable
    densmult 26 2 5010 5011
      0.0    1.832
      106    1.419
      205    1.033
      306    0.641
      385    0.611
      473    1.797
      592    1.371
      704    0.973
      817    0.568
      875    0.362 end
  end timetable
  read burndata
    power=37.883   burn=385  down=88 nlib=1 end
    power=32.215   burn=402  down=158 nlib=1 end
  end burndata
  read model
  read parm
    cfx=yes gen=620 nsk=20 npg=500 plt=no htm=no
  end parm

::

  read geom
  ' unit 2 is a water hole
    unit 2
      cylinder 26 1 .4500 10.0 0.0
      cylinder 25 1 .4950 10.0 0.0
      cuboid 26   1 0.63 -0.63 0.63 -0.63 10.0 0.0
  ' unit 1 is a material #1 rod
    unit 1
      cylinder 1  1 .4025  10.0 0.0
      cylinder 25 1 .4950 10.0 0.0
      cuboid 26   1 0.63 -0.63 0.63 -0.63 10.0 0.0
    global unit 100
      array 10 0.0 0.0 0.0
  end geom
  read array
  ara=10 nux=17 nuy=17 nuz=1 typ=cuboidal
   fill 17r1
        17r1
        8r1 2 8r1
        17r1
        17r1
        8r1 2 8r1
        17r1
        17r1
        2r1 2 2r1 2 2r1 2 2r1 2 2r1 2 2r1
        17r1
        17r1
        8r1 2 8r1
        17r1
        17r1
        8r1 2 8r1
        17r1
        17r1 end fill
  end array
  read bounds
    all=refl
  end bounds
  end data
  end model
  end

.. _3-1-6-6:

TRITON sample problem 6: triton6.inp
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sample problem *triton6.inp* performs T-DEPL depletion in a pin cell
model; however, the pin is discretized into five equal-volume rings of
fuel. Thus, CENTRM-based S\ :sub:`N` cross section processing is
necessary to capture the radial burnup of the pin cell. A *multiregion*
cell specification is given to allow specification of the varying radii
for the fuel regions. Because the multiregion cell is cylindrical, the
moderator volume is represented in terms of a radius that corresponds to
the volume associated with the pin pitch. The right boundary condition
for the cell is set to *white*; this is important, as the default right
boundary condition for a multiregion cylinder is vacuum. In this case,
addnux=1 is also requested in the parameter specification, simply for a
faster (but less accurate) calculation. Material aliases are used to
simplify input. The calculation is performed with the 238 ENDF/B-VII
library. The TRITON *TIMETABLE* block is used to demonstrate
time-dependent temperature changes to the moderator material.

::

  ' THIS SAMPLE PROBLEM TEST THE FOLLOWING:
  '  ** t-depl sequence
  '  ** v7-238 group library
  '  ** centrm cross section processing
  '  ** multiregion cross section processing option
  '  ** deplete-by-constant power
  '  ** parm=addnux=1 option to add 15 nuclides to fuel material
  '  ** system power normalization
  '  ** timetable block using temperature change
  '  ** alias block definition
  '  ** opus block
  =t-depl           parm=(centrm,addnux=1)
  Pin-cell depleted in rings
  v7-238
  read alias
    $fuel 1-5 end
  end alias
  read comp
    uo2 $fuel den=9.459 1 829.0 92234 0.027 92235 3.038 92236 0.014 92238 96.921 end
    wtptzirc  10 6.44 4 40000 97.91 26000 0.5 50116 0.86 50120 0.73 1.0 620  end
    h2o 11 den=0.7575 1 557 end
    wtptbor 11 0.7575 1 5000 100 654e-6 557 end
  end comp
  read celldata
    multiregion cylindrical right=white end
      1 0.16425
      2 0.28449
      3 0.36727
      4 0.43456
      5 0.49275
     10 0.55880
     11 .83120 end zone
  end celldata
  read depletion
    $fuel
  end depletion
  read timetable
    temperature 11
  '   cycle 1
        0.0 557.0
      306.0 557.0
  '   cycle 2
      377.0 540.0
      838.1 557.0 end
  end timetable

::

  read burndata
    power=27.24 burn=306.0 down=71   nlib=1 end
    power=34.57 burn=461.1 down=1870 nlib=1 end
  end burndata
  read opus
    units=gram symnuc=u-235 u-238 pu-239 pu-241 nd-148 end matl=0 1 2 3 4 5 end
  end opus
  read model
  Infinite lattice PWR pin cell
  read parm
    drawit=yes prtbroad=yes epsilon=1e-3 soln=b1 converg=matl
  end parm
  read materials
    mix=$fuel com='3.038 wt % enriched fuel' end
    mix=10 pn=0  com='cladding' end
    mix=11 com='water' end
  end materials
  read geom
    global unit 1
      cylinder 1 .16425 chord +x=0 chord +y=0
      cylinder 2 .28449 chord +x=0 chord +y=0
      cylinder 3 .36727 chord +x=0 chord +y=0
      cylinder 4 .43456 chord +x=0 chord +y=0
      cylinder 5 .49275 chord +x=0 chord +y=0
      cylinder 20 .5588 chord +x=0 chord +y=0
      cuboid   30 0.7366 0.0 0.7366 0.0
      media 1 1 1
      media 2 1 2 -1
      media 3 1 3 -2
      media 4 1 4 -3
      media 5 1 5 -4
      media 10 1 20 -5
      media 11 1 30 -20
    boundary 30 4 4
  end geom
  read bounds
    all=refl
  end bounds
  end model
  end

.. _3-1-6-7:

TRITON sample problem 7: triton7.inp
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sample problem triton7.inp is an example of a T-DEPL depletion
calculation for a full PWR fuel assembly model. Depletion is performed
on the basis of material 7, which is located in a single fuel pin for
which destructive assay measurements were performed. All other fuel is
modeled as a single (average) material, material 1. The parameter
specification *parm=(2region,addnux=1,weight)* was chosen to reduce the
run-time of the sample problem.

This sample problem also demonstrates the use of TRITON’s standard
composition restart files and SCALE external file reading capabilities
to represent the time-dependent behavior of an assembly in which
burnable poisons are removed after the first cycle of operation.

This problem consists of two TRITON 2D depletion cases. In the first
case, the full assembly model contains borosilicate glass burnable
poison rods (BPRs), material 4, which are included in the list of
materials to be depleted. The calculation is run for the entirety of the
first operational cycle, which included a 40-day mid-cycle decay
interval. The model also includes a 64-day decay interval after the end
of the operational cycle. When this calculation is completed, TRITON
creates in the temporary working directory a standard composition file
for each material containing the isotopic inventories for each depletion
material at the end of the 64-day decay interval. The second TRITON
calculation reads the standard composition specifications for materials
1 and 7 as part of the input to provide the fuel state for the second
calculation. In the second model, the BPRs are removed and replaced with
the moderator in the embedded NEWT model. The initial depletion
calculation uses the 252 ENDF/B-VII.1 library. With the
*parm=(…,weight)* option, a 56 group library is created in the temporary
directory called *newxnlib*. This library is used for the second
*T-NEWT* calculation.

::

  ' THIS SAMPLE PROBLEM TEST THE FOLLOWING:
  '  ** t-depl sequence
  '  ** v7-252 group library
  '  ** 2region cross section processing
  '  ** latticecell cross section processing option
  '  ** deplete-by-constant flux
  '  ** parm=addnux=1 option to add 15 nuclides to fuel material
  '  ** mixture power normalization
  '  ** timetable block using density multiplier
  '  ** composition restart files.
  '  ** weight used to collapse library for reuse in restart calculation
  =t-depl      parm=(2region,addnux=1,weight)
  ASSEMBLY model with BPRs with depletion
  v7-252
  read comp
   uo2      1 den=9.550 1 743  92234 0.023 92235 2.561 92236 0.013 92238 97.403 end
   wtptzirc 2 6.44 4 40000 97.91 26000 0.5 50116 0.86 50120 0.73 1.0 620  end
   h2o      3 den=0.7544 1 559 end
   wtptbor  3 0.7544 1 5000 100  652.5e-6 559 end
   wtptbpr  4 2.081 6 8016 53.58 11000 2.82 13027 1.758 14000 37.63 19000 0.33  5000 3.882 1 559 end
   wtptair  5 0.00129 2 7000 78.0 8016 22.0  1 559.0 end
   ss304    6 1 559.0 end
   uo2      7 den=9.550 1 743  92234 0.023 92235 2.561 92236 0.013 92238 97.403 end
   wtptzirc 8 6.44 4 40000 97.91 26000 0.5 50118 0.64 50120 0.95 1 595 end
   h2o      9 den=0.7544 1 559 end
   wtptbor  9 0.7544 1 5000 100  652.5e-6 559 end
  end comp
  read celldata
   latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.43 3 fueld=0.9484 1 cladd=1.0719 2 end
   latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.43 9 fueld=0.9484 7 cladd=1.0719 8 end
  end celldata
  read depletion
   1 -7 flux 4
  end depletion
  read timetable
   density 3 2 5010 5011
       0.00 1.000
     243.5  1.000
     283.5  0.379
     527.0  0.379 end
   density 9 2 5010 5011
       0.00 1.000
     243.5  1.000
     283.5  0.379
     527.0  0.379 end
  end timetable

::

  read burndata
    power=20.86 burn=243.5 down=40.0  nlib=1 end
    power=20.15 burn=243.5 down=64.0  nlib=1 end
  end burndata
  read model
  ASSEMBLY model with BPRs with depletion
  read parm
    drawit=yes inners=2 epsilon=-5e-2 cmfd=1 xycmfd=0 echo=yes solntype=b1 timed=yes
  end parm
  read materials
    mix=6  pn=1  com="SS-304 - BPR clad" end
    mix=5  pn=1  com="air in BPRs" end
    mix=4  pn=1  com="borosilicate glass" end
    mix=3  pn=2  com="water" end
    mix=2  pn=1  com="cladding" end
    mix=1  pn=1  com="2.561 wt % enriched fuel " end
    mix=7  pn=1  com="rod N-9" end
  end materials
  read geom
    global unit 10
      cuboid 13 10.725 0.0 10.725 0.0
      array 101 13  place 1 1 -0.715 -0.715
      media 3 1 13
    boundary 13 15 15
    unit 1
      cuboid 13 1.43 0.0 1.43 0.0
      cylinder 12 0.53595 origin x=0.715 y=0.715
      cylinder 11 0.4742 origin x=0.715 y=0.715
      media 3 1 13 -12
      media 2 1 12 -11
      media 1 1 11
    boundary 13 2 2
    unit 2
      cuboid 13 1.43 0.0 1.43 0.0
      cylinder 14 0.28385 origin x=0.715 y=0.715
      cylinder 15 0.30035 origin x=0.715 y=0.715
      cylinder 16 0.50865 origin x=0.715 y=0.715
      cylinder 17 0.55755 origin x=0.715 y=0.715
      media 3 1 13 -17
      media 6 1 17 -16
      media 4 1 16 -15
      media 6 1 15 -14
      media 5 1 14
    boundary 13 2 2
    unit 3
      cuboid 13 1.43 0.0 1.43 0.0
      cylinder 12 0.6934 origin x=0.715 y=0.715
      cylinder 11 0.6502 origin x=0.715 y=0.715
      media 3 1 13 -12
      media 2 1 12 -11
      media 3 1 11
    boundary 13 2 2
    unit 4
      cuboid 13 1.43 0.715 1.43 0.0
      cylinder 12 0.53595 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +x=0.715
      cylinder 11 0.4742 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +x=0.715
      media 3 1 13 -12
      media 2 1 12 -11
      media 1 1 11
    boundary 13 1 2
    unit 5
      cuboid 13 1.43 0.0 1.43 0.715
      cylinder 12 0.53595 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +y=0.715
      cylinder 11 0.4742 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +y=0.715
      media 3 1 13 -12
      media 2 1 12 -11
      media 1 1 11
    boundary 13 2 1
    unit 6
      cuboid 13 1.43 0.715 1.43 0.0
      cylinder 12 0.6934 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +x=0.715
      cylinder 11 0.6502 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +x=0.715
      media 3 1 13 -12
      media 2 1 12 -11
      media 3 1 11
    boundary 13 1 2

::

  unit 7
    cuboid 13 1.43 0.0 1.43 0.715
    cylinder 12 0.6934 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +y=0.715
    cylinder 11 0.6502 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +y=0.715
    media 3 1 13 -12
    media 2 1 12 -11
    media 3 1 11
  boundary 13 2 1
  unit 8
    cuboid 13 1.43 0.715 1.43 0.715
    cylinder 12 0.6934 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +x=0.715 chord +y=0.715
    cylinder 11 0.6502 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +x=0.715 chord +y=0.715
    media 3 1 13 -12
    media 2 1 12 -11
    media 3 1 11
  boundary 13 1 1
  unit 9
    cuboid 13 1.43 0.0 1.43 0.0
    cylinder 12 0.53595 origin x=0.715 y=0.715
    cylinder 11 0.4742 origin x=0.715 y=0.715
    media 3 1 13 -12
    media 2 1 12 -11
    media 7 1 11
  boundary 13 2 2
  end geom
  read array
  ara=101 nux=8 nuy=8 typ=cuboidal fill
  8 5 5 5 7 5 5 5
  4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
  4 1 1 1 1 2 1 1
  4 1 1 3 1 1 1 1
  6 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
  4 9 2 1 1 2 1 1
  4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
  4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 end fill
  end array
  end model
  end

::

  =t-newt      parm=(2region)
  ASSEMBLY model without BPRs
  newxnlib
  read comp
  <StdCmpMix00001
    wtptzirc 2 6.44 4 40000 97.91 26000 0.5 50116 0.86 50120 0.73 1.0 620  end
    h2o      3 den=0.7544 1 559 end
    wtptbor  3 0.7544 1 5000 100  652.5e-6 559 end
  <StdCmpMix00007
    wtptzirc 8 6.44 4 40000 97.91 26000 0.5 50118 0.64 50120 0.95 1 595 end
    h2o      9 den=0.7544 1 559 end
    wtptbor  9 0.7544 1 5000 100    652.5e-6 559 end
  end comp
  read celldata
     latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.43 3 fueld=0.9484 1 cladd=1.0719 2 end
     latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.43 9 fueld=0.9484 7 cladd=1.0719 8 end
  end celldata
  read model
  ASSEMBLY model without BPRs
  read parm
    drawit=yes inners=2 epsilon=-5e-2 cmfd=1 xycmfd=0 echo=yes solntype=b1 timed=yes
  end parm
  read materials
    mix=3  pn=2  com="water" end
    mix=2  pn=1  com="cladding" end
    mix=1  pn=1  com="2.561 wt % enriched fuel " end
    mix=7  pn=1  com="rod N-9" end
  end materials
  read geom
    global unit 10
      cuboid 13 10.725 0.0 10.725 0.0
      array 101 13  place 1 1 -0.715 -0.715
      media 3 1 13
    boundary 13 15 15
    unit 1
      cuboid 13 1.43 0.0 1.43 0.0
      cylinder 12 0.53595 origin x=0.715 y=0.715
      cylinder 11 0.4742 origin x=0.715 y=0.715
      media 3 1 13 -12
      media 2 1 12 -11
      media 1 1 11
    boundary 13 2 2

::

  unit 3
      cuboid 13 1.43 0.0 1.43 0.0
      cylinder 12 0.6934 origin x=0.715 y=0.715
      cylinder 11 0.6502 origin x=0.715 y=0.715
      media 3 1 13 -12
      media 2 1 12 -11
      media 3 1 11
    boundary 13 2 2
    unit 4
      cuboid 13 1.43 0.715 1.43 0.0
      cylinder 12 0.53595 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +x=0.715
      cylinder 11 0.4742 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +x=0.715
      media 3 1 13 -12
      media 2 1 12 -11
      media 1 1 11
    boundary 13 1 2
    unit 5
      cuboid 13 1.43 0.0 1.43 0.715
      cylinder 12 0.53595 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +y=0.715
      cylinder 11 0.4742 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +y=0.715
      media 3 1 13 -12
      media 2 1 12 -11
      media 1 1 11
    boundary 13 2 1
    unit 6
      cuboid 13 1.43 0.715 1.43 0.0
      cylinder 12 0.6934 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +x=0.715
      cylinder 11 0.6502 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +x=0.715
      media 3 1 13 -12
      media 2 1 12 -11
      media 3 1 11
    boundary 13 1 2
    unit 7
      cuboid 13 1.43 0.0 1.43 0.715
      cylinder 12 0.6934 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +y=0.715
      cylinder 11 0.6502 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +y=0.715
      media 3 1 13 -12
      media 2 1 12 -11
      media 3 1 11
    boundary 13 2 1

::

  unit 8
      cuboid 13 1.43 0.715 1.43 0.715
      cylinder 12 0.6934 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +x=0.715 chord +y=0.715
      cylinder 11 0.6502 origin x=0.715 y=0.715 chord +x=0.715 chord +y=0.715
      media 3 1 13 -12
      media 2 1 12 -11
      media 3 1 11
    boundary 13 1 1
    unit 9
      cuboid 13 1.43 0.0 1.43 0.0
      cylinder 12 0.53595 origin x=0.715 y=0.715
      cylinder 11 0.4742 origin x=0.715 y=0.715
      media 3 1 13 -12
      media 2 1 12 -11
      media 7 1 11
    boundary 13 2 2
  end geom
  read array
  ara=101 nux=8 nuy=8 typ=cuboidal fill
  8 5 5 5 7 5 5 5
  4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
  4 1 1 1 1 3 1 1
  4 1 1 3 1 1 1 1
  6 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
  4 9 3 1 1 3 1 1
  4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
  4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 end fill
  end array
  end model
  end

.. _3-1-6-8:

TRITON sample problem 8: triton8.inp
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sample problem *triton8.inp* is an example of TRITON’s simplified cross
section processing scheme in a BWR-like configuration. It uses the
T-DEPL extended format for the *DEPLETION* block to allow material
assignments to be made to reduce the number of cross section processing
calculations required in a multimaterial depletion model. In this sample
problem, the lower-left quadrant of a 6 x 6 fuel assembly is modeled
(see :numref:`fig3-1-17`). The fuel pin layout is as follows: one 2.3%
:sup:`235`\ U-enriched fuel pin in the southwest corner (red pin),
one-fourth of a water rod in the northeast corner, five 3.6%
:sup:`235`\ U-enriched fuel pins (2 green, 1 yellow, and 2 blue pins),
and two gadolinium-bearing pins each modeled with three fuel rings.
(Gadolinium-bearing pins are typically modeled with multiple fuel rings
due to the strong spatial dependence of the flux.) Due to diagonal
symmetry, only seven depletion material regions need to be defined: the
red, green, yellow, and blue pins along with three regions for the
gadolinium-bearing pins. Although seven depletion materials are defined,
only three cell specifications are used: one for the gadolinium-bearing
pin cell and one each for the 2.3% and 3.6% :sup:`235`\ U-enriched pin
cells. This model makes extensive use of aliases. The sequence is run
with *parm=(addnux=0,…)*, which includes no extra nuclides, for an
accelerated solution; however, this is an extremely poor approximation
unless important nuclides are manually specified. This example also
illustrates the use of the keyword *flux* in the *DEPLETION* data block
to force flux-based ORIGEN calculations in place of power-based
calculation for all three rings of the gadolinium-bearing fuel pins.
Finally, this case uses the *parm=(…,weight,…)* directive to request the
automatic collapse of the input 238 ENDF/B-VII library to a 49 group
library (collapsed using the 238-group system-averaged flux), which is
then used for depletion calculations.

::

  ' THIS SAMPLE PROBLEM TEST THE FOLLOWING:
  '  ** t-depl sequence
  '  ** v7-238 group library
  '  ** centrm cross section processing
  '  ** parm=weight option for the t-depl sequence, which uses builtin 49-group collapse
  '  ** latticecell cross section processing option
  '  ** multi-region cross section processing option
  '  ** deplete-by-constant flux and by constant power
  '  ** parm=addnux=0 option to add 0 nuclides to fuel material
  '  ** system power normalization
  '  ** depletion assignments
  '  ** alias block
  =t-depl    parm=(addnux=0,weight)
  BWR-like depletion model with lattice physics calculations
  v7-238
  read alias
   $fuel23 1 end
   $fuel36 2-4 end
   $2fuels 1,2 end
   $2clads 401-402 end
   $2mods 201-202 end
   $fuelg 5-7 end
   $h2osolid 399 end
   $allfuels 1-7 end
  end alias
  read comp
  ' 2.3 w/o
    u-234 1 0 4.7008e-06 900 end
    u-235 1 0 5.2968e-04 900 end
    u-236 1 0 3.4083e-06 900 end
    u-238 1 0 2.2208e-02 900 end
    o-16  1 0 4.5491e-02 900 end
  ' 3.6 w/o
    u-234 2 0 7.5720e-06 900 end
    u-235 2 0 8.2904e-04 900 end
    u-236 2 0 5.1701e-06 900 end
    u-238 2 0 2.1907e-02 900 end
    o-16  2 0 4.5497e-02 900 end
  ' Gd Pin
    u-234 $fuelg 0 5.8824e-06 900 end
    u-235 $fuelg 0 6.5057e-04 900 end
    u-236 $fuelg 0 4.1028e-06 900 end
    u-238 $fuelg 0 2.0759e-02 900 end
    o-16  $fuelg 0 4.5095e-02 900 end
    gd-154 $fuelg 0 3.2253e-05 900 end
    gd-155 $fuelg 0 2.2141e-04 900 end
    gd-156 $fuelg 0 3.0778e-04 900 end
    gd-157 $fuelg 0 2.3576e-04 900 end
    gd-158 $fuelg 0 3.7393e-04 900 end
    gd-160 $fuelg 0 3.3200e-04 900 end
  ' Clad nat. zr per spec.
    zirc4  $2clads den=6.53 1 559 end
    zirc4  409 den=6.53 1 559 end
  ' lwtr mod    den (g/cc) (1-void) tmp(K)
    h2o $2mods  den=0.457 1.0000   559 end
    h2o 209  den=0.457 1.0000   559 end
    h2o 399  den=0.737 1.0000   559 end
  end comp

::

  read celldata
    latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.63 $2mods fuelr=0.529 $2fuels cladr=0.615 $2clads end
    multiregion cylindrical right_bdy=white end
      7  0.37405950
      6  0.45812740
      5  0.52900000
    409  0.61500000
    209  0.91962900 end zone
  end celldata
  read depletion
    $fuel23 $fuel36 flux $fuelg end
    assign 1 $fuel23 end
    assign 2 $fuel36 end
  end depletion
  read burndata
    power=25.0 burn=300  end
  end burndata
  read model
  BWR-like model with lattice physics calculations
  read parm
    soln=b1 echo=yes drawit=yes sn=4 collapse=yes epsilon=1e-3 cmfd=yes xycmfd=3
  end parm
  read materials
    mix=$allfuels pn=0 end
    mix=401       pn=0  com='Zirc4' end
    mix=201       pn=0  com='H2O(void)' end
    mix=399       pn=0  com='H2O(solid)' end
  end materials
  read adf
    1 500 w=0.0 s=0.0
  end adf
  read collapse
    30r1 19r2
  end collapse
  read hmog
    500 PSZ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 401 399 201 end
  end hmog

::

  read geom
    unit 001
      cuboid 1 1.63 0.0000 1.63 0.0000
      cylinder 2 0.615 origin x=0.815 y=0.815
      cylinder 3 0.529 origin x=0.815 y=0.815
      media 201 1 1 -2
      media 401 1 2 -3
      media 001 1 3
    boundary 1 3 3
    unit 002
      cuboid 1 1.63 0.0000 1.63 0.0000
      cylinder 2 0.615 origin x=0.815 y=0.815
      cylinder 3 0.529 origin x=0.815 y=0.815
      media 201 1 1 -2
      media 401 1 2 -3
      media 002 1 3
    boundary 1 3 3
    unit 003
      cuboid 1 1.63 0.0000 1.63 0.0000
      cylinder 2 0.615 origin x=0.815 y=0.815
      cylinder 3 0.529 origin x=0.815 y=0.815
      media 201 1 1 -2
      media 401 1 2 -3
      media 003 1 3
    boundary 1 3 3
    unit 004
      cuboid 1 1.63 0.0000 1.63 0.0000
      cylinder 2 0.615 origin x=0.815 y=0.815
      cylinder 3 0.529 origin x=0.815 y=0.815
      media 201 1 1 -2
      media 401 1 2 -3
      media 004 1 3
    boundary 1 3 3
    unit 005
      cuboid 1 1.6300 0.0000 1.6300 0.0000
      cylinder 2 0.6150 origin x=0.8150 y=0.8150
      cylinder  3 0.52900000 origin x=0.8150 y=0.8150
      cylinder  4 0.45812740 origin x=0.8150 y=0.8150
      cylinder  5 0.37405950 origin x=0.8150 y=0.8150
      media 201 1 1 -2
      media 401 1 2 -3
      media 005 1 003   -4
      media 006 1 004   -5
      media 007 1 005
    boundary 1 3 3
  ' water channels
    unit 121
      cuboid 1 1.63 0.0000 1.63 0.0000
      cylinder 2 1.6 origin x=1.63 y=1.63
      chord -x=1.63 chord -y=1.63 sides=16
      cylinder 3 1.5 origin x=1.63 y=1.63
      chord -x=1.63 chord -y=1.63 sides=16
      media 201 1 1 -2
      media 401 1 2 -3
      media 399 1 3
    boundary 1 3 3
    global unit 50
      cuboid 1 5.99 1.10  5.99 1.1
      cuboid 2 5.99 0.846 5.99 0.846
      cuboid 3 5.99 0.00  5.99 0.00
      array 1 1 place 1 1 1.1 1.1
      media 399 1 3 -2
      media 401 1 2 -1
    boundary 3 12 12
  end geom
    ara=1 nux=3 nuy=3 pinpow=yes fill   1   2   3
                                      2   4   5
                                      3   5   121  end fill
  end array
  end model
  end

.. _fig3-1-17:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig17.png
  :align: center
  :width: 500

  BWR-like assembly design for triton8.

.. _3-1-6-9:

TRITON sample problem 9: triton9.inp
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sample problem *triton9.inp* illustrates the use of the TSUNAMI-2D
sequence for sensitivity and uncertainty (S/U) analysis of a PWR pin
cell. The SCALE ENDF/B-VII 238-group library is used, with cross section
processing performed by BONAMIST and CENTRM/PMC. In this sample problem,
the *DEFINITIONS* and *SYSTEMRESPONSES* blocks are used to define four
additional responses in addition to *k* for S/U analysis:
:sup:`235`\ U one-group absorption cross section, :sup:`235`\ U
one-group fission cross section, :sup:`238`\ U one-group absorption
cross section, and :sup:`238`\ U one-group fission cross section. The
SAMS block is also used to disable the HTML-formatted output for this
model.

::

  ' THIS SAMPLE PROBLEM TEST THE FOLLOWING:
  '  ** tsunami-2d sequence
  '  ** v7-238 group library
  '  ** bonamist/centrm cross section processing with (default for tsunami-2d calculations)
  '  ** latticecell cross section processing option
  '  ** User defined ratio responsed defined in the definitions block and system responses block
  =tsunami-2d
  PWR Unit Cell
  v7-238
  read comp
  ' fuel
    uo2   10 den=10.283  1 551.0 92235  4.85 92234 0.045 92238 95.105 end
    zirc4 20             1 551.0 end
    h2o   30 den=0.766   1 551.0 end
    he    40 den=0.00125 1 551.0 end
  end comp
  read celldata
    latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.4427 30 fueld=0.9391 10 cladd=1.0928 20 gapd=0.9582 40  end
  end celldata
  read definitions
    response 3
      nuclide=92235 mt=102 mixture=10 micro
    end response
    response 4
      nuclide=92235 mt= 18 mixture=10 micro
    end response
    response 5
      nuclide=92238 mt=102 mixture=10 micro
    end response
    response 6
      nuclide=92238 mt= 18 mixture=10 micro
    end response
    response 7
      unity multimix 10 20 30 40 end
    end response
  end definitions

::

  read systemresponses
    ratio 3 numer 3 4 end denom 7 end title='U235-abs' end ratio
    ratio 4 numer   4 end denom 7 end title='U235-fis' end ratio
    ratio 5 numer 5 6 end denom 7 end title='U238-abs' end ratio
    ratio 6 numer   6 end denom 7 end title='U238-fis' end ratio
  end systemresponses
  read sams
  nohtml
  end sams
  read model
  PWR Unit Cell
  read parm
  echo=yes saveangflx=yes
  end parm
  read materials
    mix=10 end
    mix=20 end
    mix=30 end
    mix=40 end
  end material
  read geom
    global unit 1
      cuboid   1 0.72135 0 0.72135 0
      cylinder 2 0.5464  sides=16 chord +x=0 chord +y=0
      cylinder 3 0.4791  sides=16 chord +x=0 chord +y=0
      cylinder 4 0.46955 sides=16 chord +x=0 chord +y=0
      media 10 1 4
      media 40 1 3 -4
      media 20 1 2 -3
      media 30 1 1 -2
    boundary 1 2 2
  end geom
  read bounds
    all=refl
  end bounds
  end model
  end

.. _3-1-6-10:

TRITON sample problem 10: triton10.inp
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sample problem *triton10.inp* performs NEWT-based depletion of a
one-fourth symmetric assembly model. The primary intent of this sample
problem is to test and to demonstrate the use of branches and archival
of computed cross sections for a depletion case. The model includes two
branch calculations—in addition to the nominal condition—that
demonstrate the different perturbation outputs available in the *BRANCH*
block. A two-group collapse is requested in the NEWT input, along with
homogenization over all materials. (Note that the parameter
specification *parm=(addnux=1)* is only used to reduce run-time of the
sample problem.) At the end of the calculation, the binary file
“xfile016” and text file “txtfile16” will exist in the temporary working
directory and will contain all lattice physics parameters for all
branches at all depletion states. These files are often copied back from
the SCALE temporary working directory to another more permanent
directory for subsequent post-processing.

::

  ' THIS SAMPLE PROBLEM TEST THE FOLLOWING:
  '  ** t-depl sequence
  '  ** v7-56 group library
  '  ** centrm cross section processing
  '  ** latticecell cross section processing option
  '  ** deplete-by-constant power
  '  ** parm=addnux=1 option to add 15 nuclides to fuel material
  '  ** system power normalization
  '  ** branch block to generate few-group cross sections.
  =t-depl parm=(addnux=1)
  1/4 assembly model
  v7-56
  read comp
    uo2      1 0.95 923 92235 3.0 92238 97.0 end
    zirc2    2 1 595 end
    h2o      3 den=0.7135 1      579 end
    boron    3 den=0.7135 600e-6 579 end
    n        4 den=0.00125 1 595 end
    zirc2    5 1 579 end
    h2o      6 den=0.7135 1      579 end
    boron    6 den=0.7135 600e-6 579 end
    h2o      7 den=0.7135 1      579 end
    boron    7 den=0.7135 600e-6 579 end
    zirc2    8 1 579 end
    b4c      9 den=2.52 1 579 end
  end comp
  read celldata
    latticecell squarepitch pitch=1.4300 3 fueld=0.9294 1 gapd=0.9484  4 cladd=1.0719 2 end
  end celldata
  read depletion
    1
  end depletion
  read burndata
    power=40.0  burn=75 end
  end burndata
  read branch
    define fuel 1 end
    define mod  3 end
    define crout 8 9 end
    define crin  6 7 end
    define d2pset 10 1 0.53 end
    define d2pset 20 1 0.93 end
    tf=923 dm=.7135 tm=579 cr=0 sb=600 end
    dm=0.01 sb=0 d2p=20 end
    cr=1 d2p=10 tf=300 end
  end branch
  read model
  1/4 assembly model
  read parm
    echo=yes drawit=no cmfd=1 xycmfd=0 inners=2 epsilon=-5e-5 outers=300
  end parm

::

  read materials
    mix=1 pn=0 com="fuel"  end
    mix=2 pn=0 com="clad" end
    mix=3 pn=0 com="water" end
    mix=4 pn=0 com="gap" end
    mix=5 pn=0 com="guide tube" end
    mix=6 pn=0 com="CRout-clad" end
    mix=7 pn=0 com="CRout-abs" end
    mix=8 pn=0 com="CRin-clad" end
    mix=9 pn=0 com="CRin-abs" end
  end materials
  read geom
    unit 1
      com='fuel rod'
      cylinder 10 .4647
      cylinder 20 .4742
      cylinder 30 .53595
      cuboid   40  4p0.715
      media 1 1 10
      media 4 1 20 -10
      media 2 1 30 -20
      media 3 1 40 -30
    boundary  40 2 2
    unit 5
      com='guide tube'
      cylinder 10 .45
      cylinder 20 .52
      cylinder 30 .6502
      cylinder 40 .6934
      cuboid   50  4p0.715
      media 7 1 10
      media 6 1 20 -10
      media 3 1 30 -20
      media 5 1 40 -30
      media 3 1 50 -40
    boundary  50 2 2
    unit 11
      com='right half of fuel rod'
      cylinder 10 .4647   chord +x=0
      cylinder 20 .4742   chord +x=0
      cylinder 30 .53595  chord +x=0
      cuboid   40  0.715  0.0 2p0.715
      media 1 1 10
      media 4 1 20 -10
      media 2 1 30 -20
      media 3 1 40 -30
    boundary  40 1 2

::

  unit 12
      com='top half of fuel rod'
      cylinder 10 .4647   chord +y=0
      cylinder 20 .4742   chord +y=0
      cylinder 30 .53595  chord +y=0
      cuboid   40  2p0.715 0.715 0.0
      media 1 1 10
      media 4 1 20 -10
      media 2 1 30 -20
      media 3 1 40 -30
    boundary  40 2 1
    unit 51
      com='right half of guide tube'
      cylinder 10 .45   chord +x=0
      cylinder 20 .52   chord +x=0
      cylinder 30 .6502 chord +x=0
      cylinder 40 .6934 chord +x=0
      cuboid   50  0.715 0.0 2p0.715
      media 7 1 10
      media 6 1 20 -10
      media 3 1 30 -20
      media 5 1 40 -30
      media 3 1 50 -40
    boundary  50 1 2
    unit 52
      com='top half of guide tube'
      cylinder 10 .45   chord +y=0
      cylinder 20 .52   chord +y=0
      cylinder 30 .6502 chord +y=0
      cylinder 40 .6934 chord +y=0
      cuboid   50  2p0.715 0.715 0.0
      media 7 1 10
      media 6 1 20 -10
      media 3 1 30 -20
      media 5 1 40 -30
      media 3 1 50 -40
    boundary  50 2 1
    unit 53
      com='1/4 instrument tube'
      cylinder 10 .6502   chord +x=0 chord +y=0
      cylinder 20 .6934   chord +x=0 chord +y=0
      cuboid   40  0.715 0.0 0.715 0.0
      media 3 1 10
      media 5 1 20 -10
      media 3 1 40 -20
    boundary  40 1 1

::

  global unit 10
      com='1/4 assembly'
      cuboid 10 10.725 0.0 10.725 0.0
      array 1 10 place 1 1 0 0
      media 3 1 10
    boundary 10 15 15
  end geom
  read coll
    25r1 19r2
  end coll
  read homog
    500 allmatl 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 end
  end homog
  read array
    ara=1 nux=8 nuy=8 typ=cuboidal pinpow=yes
    fill
      53  12 12 12 52 12 12 12
      11  1  1  1  1  1  1  1
      11  1  1  1  1  5  1  1
      11  1  1  5  1  1  1  1
      51  1  1  1  1  1  1  1
      11  1  5  1  1  5  1  1
      11  1  1  1  1  1  1  1
      11  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  end fill
  end array
  read bounds
    all=refl
  end bounds
  end model
  end

.. _3-1-6-11:

TRITON sample problem 11: triton11.inp
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sample problem *triton11.inp* demonstrates the use of determining
Dancoff factors for a BWR fuel assembly. The BWR assembly design
contains a 7 x 7 array of fuel pins enclosed by a channel box (see
:numref:`fig3-1-18`). The in-channel moderator void fraction is 40%, and the
bypass moderator void fraction is 0%. The input file contains an
MCDANCOFF input file that calculates the Dancoff factors for each fuel
pin (See the MCDANCOFF chapter). The MCDANCOFF input is essentially the
equivalent of the KENO-VI model of the 2D assembly design. Following the
MCDANCOFF input, the T-NEWT input is provided that shows how the
computed Dancoff factors are inserted into the TRITON model. The Dancoff
factors are inserted into the model via the *centrmdata* keyword entry
in the *CELLDATA* block.

.. _fig3-1-18:
.. figure:: figs/TRITON/fig18.png
  :align: center
  :width: 500

  triton11 BWR assembly design.

::

  ' THIS SAMPLE PROBLEM TESTS THE FOLLOWING:
  '  ** mcdancoff sequence to compute problem dependent dancoffs.
  =mcdancoff
  PB CYCLE1
  xn01
  read comp
    uo2   1 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 2.93 92234 0.0261 92236 0.0135 92238 97.0304 end
    uo2 201 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 2.93 92234 0.0261 92236 0.0135 92238 97.0304 end
    uo2   2 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.94 92234 0.0173 92236 0.0089 92238 98.0338 end
    uo2 202 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.94 92234 0.0173 92236 0.0089 92238 98.0338 end
    uo2 212 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.94 92234 0.0173 92236 0.0089 92238 98.0338 end
    uo2 203 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.69 92234 0.0150 92236 0.0078 92238 98.2872 end
    uo2 213 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.69 92234 0.0150 92236 0.0078 92238 98.2872 end
    uo2   4 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.33 92234 0.0118 92236 0.0061 92238 98.6521 end
    uo2 500 den=10.29 0.97 900 92235 2.93 92234 0.0261 92236 0.0135 92238 97.0304 end
    gd2o3 500 den=10.29 0.03 900 end
    he 121 den=4.9559E-4 1 711.15 end
    zirc2 101 den=5.678 1 630 end
    h2o 111 den=0.4577 1 560 end
    zirc4 630 den=6.525 1 630 end
    h2o   620 den=0.738079 1 560  end
  end comp
  read parm
    gen=100 npg=100 nsk=0 htm=no flx=yes fdn=yes run=yes
  end parm
  read geom
    unit   11
      com="corner rod 1.33% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579  2p1.0
      cylinder 2   0.62103  2p1.0
      cylinder 3   0.71501  2p1.0
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375   2p1.0
      media   4 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4
    unit   12
      com="edge rod 1.69% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579  2p1.0
      cylinder 2   0.62103  2p1.0
      cylinder 3   0.71501  2p1.0
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375   2p1.0
      media 203 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4
    unit   14
      com="edge rod 1.94% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579  2p1.0
      cylinder 2   0.62103  2p1.0
      cylinder 3   0.71501  2p1.0
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375   2p1.0
      media 202 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4
    unit   17
      com="corner rod 1.69% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579  2p1.0
      cylinder 2   0.62103  2p1.0
      cylinder 3   0.71501  2p1.0
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375   2p1.0
      media 213 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4
    unit   22
      com="interior rod 1.94% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579  2p1.0
      cylinder 2   0.62103  2p1.0
      cylinder 3   0.71501  2p1.0
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375   2p1.0
      media   2 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4
    unit   23
      com="interior rod 2.93% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579  2p1.0
      cylinder 2   0.62103  2p1.0
      cylinder 3   0.71501  2p1.0
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375   2p1.0
      media   1 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4

::

  unit   33
      com="interior gad pin"
      cylinder 5   0.60579  2p1.0
      cylinder 6   0.62103  2p1.0
      cylinder 7   0.71501  2p1.0
      cuboid   8 4p0.9375   2p1.0
      media 500 1 5
      media 121 1 6 -5
      media 101 1 7 -6
      media 111 1 8 -7
      boundary    8
    unit   37
      com="edge rod 2.93% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579  2p1.0
      cylinder 2   0.62103  2p1.0
      cylinder 3   0.71501  2p1.0
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375   2p1.0
      media 201 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4
    unit   77
     com="corner rod 1.94% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579  2p1.0
      cylinder 2   0.62103  2p1.0
      cylinder 3   0.71501  2p1.0
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375   2p1.0
      media 212 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4
  global unit 100
      cuboid  1   4p6.5625   2p1.0
      array 1 1  place 4 4 1  0.0 0.0 0.0
      cuboid  2   4p6.70306  2p1.0
      cuboid  3   4p6.90626  2p1.0
      cuboid  10  4p7.62     2p1.0
      media   111 1 2 -1
      media   630 1 3 -2
      media   620 1 10 -3
      boundary 10
  end geom

::

  read array
    ara=1 nux=7 nuy=7 nuz=1 typ=cuboidal
    fill
      17  14  37  37  37  14  77
      14  23  33  23  23  23  14
      14  23  23  23  33  23  37
      14  23  23  23  23  23  37
      12  23  33  23  23  33  37
      12  22  23  23  23  23  14
      11  12  12  14  14  14  17 end fill
  end array
  read bounds
    all=refl
  end bounds
  read start
    dancoff  array  1  1  1  1  unit  17  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  1  2  1  unit  14  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  1  3  1  unit  14  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  1  4  1  unit  14  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  1  5  1  unit  12  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  1  6  1  unit  12  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  1  7  1  unit  11  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  2  1  1  unit  14  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  2  2  1  unit  23  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  2  3  1  unit  23  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  2  4  1  unit  23  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  2  5  1  unit  23  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  2  6  1  unit  22  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  3  1  1  unit  37  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  3  2  1  unit  33  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  3  3  1  unit  23  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  3  4  1  unit  23  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  3  5  1  unit  33  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  4  1  1  unit  37  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  4  2  1  unit  23  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  4  3  1  unit  23  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  4  4  1  unit  23  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  5  1  1  unit  37  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  5  2  1  unit  23  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  5  3  1  unit  33  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  6  1  1  unit  14  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  6  2  1  unit  23  region 1
    dancoff  array  1  7  1  1  unit  77  region 1
  end start
  end data
  end

::

  =t-newt   parm=(check)
  PB CYCLE1
  v7-252
  ' Data taken from:
  '        Benchmark for Uncertainty Analysis in Modeling (UAM)
  '        for Design, Operation and Safety Analyses of LWRs,
  '        Nuclear Energy Agency, 2007.
  read alias
   $gadpin 500 end
   $clad   101 102 103 104 105 301 302 303 304 305 end
   $mod    111 112 113 114 115 311 312 313 314 315 end
   $gap    121 122 123 124 125 321 322 323 324 325 end
  end alias
  read comp
  ' 2.93% enriched fuel pin
    uo2   1 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 2.93 92234 0.0261 92236 0.0135 92238 97.0304 end
    uo2 201 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 2.93 92234 0.0261 92236 0.0135 92238 97.0304 end
  ' 1.94% enriched fuel pin
    uo2   2 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.94 92234 0.0173 92236 0.0089 92238 98.0338 end
    uo2 202 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.94 92234 0.0173 92236 0.0089 92238 98.0338 end
    uo2 212 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.94 92234 0.0173 92236 0.0089 92238 98.0338 end
  ' 1.69% enriched fuel pin
    uo2 203 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.69 92234 0.0150 92236 0.0078 92238 98.2872 end
    uo2 213 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.69 92234 0.0150 92236 0.0078 92238 98.2872 end
  ' 1.33% enriched fuel pin
    uo2   4 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.33 92234 0.0118 92236 0.0061 92238 98.6521 end
  ' 3% Gd2O3 by weigh, 2.93% enriched fuel pin
    uo2   $gadpin den=10.29 0.97 900 92235 2.93 92234 0.0261 92236 0.0135 92238 97.0304 end
    gd2o3 $gadpin den=10.29 0.03 900 end
  ' gap/clad/moderator
    he    $gap  den=4.9559E-4 1 711.15  end
    zirc2 $clad den=5.678 1 630 end
    h2o   $mod    den=0.4577 1  560  end
  ' channel
    zirc4 630 den=6.525 1 630 end
  ' water in bypass
    h2o   620 den=0.738079 1 560  end
  end comp
  read celldata
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.87452 111 fuelr=0.60579   1 gapr=0.62103 121 cladr=0.71501 101 end
      centrmdata dan2pitch=0.504 end centrmdata
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.87452 112 fuelr=0.60579   2 gapr=0.62103 122 cladr=0.71501 102 end
      centrmdata dan2pitch=0.494 end centrmdata
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.87452 114 fuelr=0.60579   4 gapr=0.62103 124 cladr=0.71501 104 end
      centrmdata dan2pitch=0.362 end centrmdata
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.87452 311 fuelr=0.60579 201 gapr=0.62103 321 cladr=0.71501 301 end
      centrmdata dan2pitch=0.423 end centrmdata
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.87452 312 fuelr=0.60579 202 gapr=0.62103 322 cladr=0.71501 302 end
      centrmdata dan2pitch=0.423 end centrmdata
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.87452 313 fuelr=0.60579 203 gapr=0.62103 323 cladr=0.71501 303 end
      centrmdata dan2pitch=0.417 end centrmdata
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.87452 314 fuelr=0.60579 212 gapr=0.62103 324 cladr=0.71501 304 end
      centrmdata dan2pitch=0.359 end centrmdata
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.87452 315 fuelr=0.60579 213 gapr=0.62103 325 cladr=0.71501 305 end
      centrmdata dan2pitch=0.357 end centrmdata
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.87452 115 fuelr=0.60579 500 gapr=0.62103 125 cladr=0.71501 105 end
      centrmdata dan2pitch=0.506 end centrmdata
  end celldata

::

  read model
  PB CYCLE1
  read parm
   echo=yes timed=yes drawit=yes cmfd=1 epsilon=3e-3 inners=2 therm=yes therms=1 outers=9999 xycmfd=4
  end parm
  read materials
    mix=  1        pn=1  com='2.93% UO2'         end
    mix=  2        pn=1  com='1.94% UO2'         end
    mix=  4        pn=1  com='1.33% UO2'         end
    mix=$gadpin    pn=1  com='2.93% UO2 (3% Gd)' end
    mix=201        pn=1  com='2.93% UO2, edge'   end
    mix=202        pn=1  com='1.94% UO2, edge'   end
    mix=212        pn=1  com='1.94% UO2, corner' end
    mix=203        pn=1  com='1.69% UO2, edge'   end
    mix=213        pn=1  com='1.69% UO2, corner' end
    mix=111        pn=2  com='H2O(void)'         end
    mix=101        pn=1  com='Zirc2'             end
    mix=121        pn=1  com='Helium'            end
    mix=620        pn=2  com='H2O(solid)'        end
    mix=630        pn=1  com='Zirc4'             end
  end materials
  read geom
    unit   11
      com="corner rod 1.33% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579
      cylinder 2   0.62103
      cylinder 3   0.71501
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375
      media   4 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4  2 2
    unit   12
      com="edge rod 1.69% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579
      cylinder 2   0.62103
      cylinder 3   0.71501
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375
      media 203 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4  2 2
    unit   14
      com="edge rod 1.94% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579
      cylinder 2   0.62103
      cylinder 3   0.71501
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375
      media 202 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4  2 2

::

  unit   17
      com="corner rod 1.69% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579
      cylinder 2   0.62103
      cylinder 3   0.71501
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375
      media 213 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4  2 2
    unit   22
      com="interior rod 1.94% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579
      cylinder 2   0.62103
      cylinder 3   0.71501
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375
      media   2 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4  2 2
    unit   23
      com="interior rod 2.93% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579
      cylinder 2   0.62103
      cylinder 3   0.71501
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375
      media   1 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4  2 2
    unit   33
      com="interior gad pin"
      cylinder 1   0.270917524
      cylinder 2   0.383135237
      cylinder 3   0.469242916
      cylinder 4   0.541835048
      cylinder 5   0.60579
      cylinder 6   0.62103
      cylinder 7   0.71501
      cuboid   8 4p0.9375
      media 500 1 1
      media 500 1 2 -1
      media 500 1 3 -2
      media 500 1 4 -3
      media 500 1 5 -4
      media 121 1 6 -5
      media 101 1 7 -6
      media 111 1 8 -7
      boundary    8  2 2
    unit   37
      com="edge rod 2.93% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579
      cylinder 2   0.62103
      cylinder 3   0.71501
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375
      media 201 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4  2 2

::

  unit   77
     com="corner rod 1.94% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579
      cylinder 2   0.62103
      cylinder 3   0.71501
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375
      media 212 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4  2 2
  global unit 100
     cuboid  1   4p6.70306
     array 1 1  place 4 4  0.0 0.0
     cuboid  2   4p6.90626
     cuboid  10  4p7.62
     media   111 1 1
     media   630 1 2 -1
     media   620 1 10 -2
     boundary 10 32 32
  end geom
  read array
    ara=1 nux=7 nuy=7 typ=cuboidal
    fill
      17  14  37  37  37  14  77
      14  23  33  23  23  23  14
      14  23  23  23  33  23  37
      14  23  23  23  23  23  37
      12  23  33  23  23  33  37
      12  22  23  23  23  23  14
      11  12  12  14  14  14  17 end fill
  end array
  read bounds
    all=refl
  end bounds
  end model
  end

.. _3-1-6-12:

TRITON sample problem 12: triton12.inp
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sample problem *triton12.inp* illustrates the use of the TSUNAMI-2D
sequence for sensitivity and uncertainty (S/U) analysis of the BWR fuel
assembly. The sample problem builds on the output of the previous sample
problem. Sample problem 11 demonstrates how MCDANCOFF is used to compute
fuel pin Dancoff factors for designs where nonuniform lattice effects
play a critical role in cross section processing. The Dancoff factors
are inserted into the follow-on *T-NEWT* model through the *centrmdata*
keyword in the *CELLDATA* block. The output for the *T-NEWT* model in
sample problem 11 provides an adjusted moderator pitch needed to
preserve the user-specified Dancoff factor. These adjusted pitch values
are used in *triton12.inp* for the S/U analysis of *k*\ :sub:`eff` for this
assembly. As common in other sample problems, several input options were
used to reduce the run-time—and therefore solution accuracy—of the
sample problem.

::

  ' THIS SAMPLE PROBLEM TESTS THE FOLLOWING:
  '  ** tsunami-2d sequence
  '  ** v7-238 library
  '  ** bonamist/centrm cross section processing option
  '  ** alias block to simplify input
  '  ** latticecell cross section processing option.
  =tsunami-2d
  PB CYCLE1
  v7-238
  ' Data taken from:
  '        Benchmark for Uncertainty Analysis in Modeling (UAM)
  '        for Design, Operation and Safety Analyses of LWRs,
  '        Nuclear Energy Agency, 2007.
  read alias
   $gadpin 500 end
   $clad   101 102 103 104 105 301 302 303 304 305 end
   $mod    111 112 113 114 115 311 312 313 314 315 end
   $gap    121 122 123 124 125 321 322 323 324 325 end
  end alias
  read comp
  ' 2.93% enriched fuel pin
    uo2   1 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 2.93 92234 0.0261 92236 0.0135 92238 97.0304 end
    uo2 201 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 2.93 92234 0.0261 92236 0.0135 92238 97.0304 end
  ' 1.94% enriched fuel pin
    uo2   2 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.94 92234 0.0173 92236 0.0089 92238 98.0338 end
    uo2 202 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.94 92234 0.0173 92236 0.0089 92238 98.0338 end
    uo2 212 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.94 92234 0.0173 92236 0.0089 92238 98.0338 end
  ' 1.69% enriched fuel pin
    uo2 203 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.69 92234 0.0150 92236 0.0078 92238 98.2872 end
    uo2 213 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.69 92234 0.0150 92236 0.0078 92238 98.2872 end
  ' 1.33% enriched fuel pin
    uo2   4 den=10.42 0.99 900 92235 1.33 92234 0.0118 92236 0.0061 92238 98.6521 end
  ' 3% Gd2O3 by weigh, 2.93% enriched fuel pin
    uo2   $gadpin den=10.29 0.97 900 92235 2.93 92234 0.0261 92236 0.0135 92238 97.0304 end
    gd2o3 $gadpin den=10.29 0.03 900 end
  ' gap/clad/moderator
    he    $gap  den=4.9559E-4 1 711.15  end
    zirc2 $clad den=5.678 1 630 end
    h2o   $mod    den=0.4577 1  560  end
  ' channel
    zirc4 630 den=6.525 1 630 end
  ' water in bypass
    h2o   620 den=0.738079 1 560  end
  end comp

::

  read celldata
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.6359 111 fuelr=0.60579   1 gapr=0.62103 121 cladr=0.71501 101 end
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.6492 112 fuelr=0.60579   2 gapr=0.62103 122 cladr=0.71501 102 end
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.8588 114 fuelr=0.60579   4 gapr=0.62103 124 cladr=0.71501 104 end
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.7524 311 fuelr=0.60579 201 gapr=0.62103 321 cladr=0.71501 301 end
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.7524 312 fuelr=0.60579 202 gapr=0.62103 322 cladr=0.71501 302 end
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.7621 313 fuelr=0.60579 203 gapr=0.62103 323 cladr=0.71501 303 end
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.8646 314 fuelr=0.60579 212 gapr=0.62103 324 cladr=0.71501 304 end
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.8684 315 fuelr=0.60579 213 gapr=0.62103 325 cladr=0.71501 305 end
    latticecell squarep pitch=1.6333 115 fuelr=0.60579 500 gapr=0.62103 125 cladr=0.71501 105 end
  end celldata
  read model
  PB CYCLE1
  read parm
   echo=yes timed=yes drawit=yes cmfd=1 epsilon=3e-4 inners=5 therm=yes therms=1 outers=9999 xycmfd=4 saveangflx=yes
  end parm
  read materials
    mix=  1        pn=1  com='2.93% UO2'         end
    mix=  2        pn=1  com='1.94% UO2'         end
    mix=  4        pn=1  com='1.33% UO2'         end
    mix=$gadpin    pn=1  com='2.93% UO2 (3% Gd)' end
    mix=201        pn=1  com='2.93% UO2, edge'   end
    mix=202        pn=1  com='1.94% UO2, edge'   end
    mix=212        pn=1  com='1.94% UO2, corner' end
    mix=203        pn=1  com='1.69% UO2, edge'   end
    mix=213        pn=1  com='1.69% UO2, corner' end
    mix=111        pn=2  com='H2O(void)'         end
    mix=101        pn=1  com='Zirc2'             end
    mix=121        pn=1  com='Helium'            end
    mix=620        pn=2  com='H2O(solid)'        end
    mix=630        pn=1  com='Zirc4'             end
  end materials

::

  read geom
    unit   11
      com="corner rod 1.33% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579
      cylinder 2   0.62103
      cylinder 3   0.71501
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375
      media   4 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4  2 2
    unit   12
      com="edge rod 1.69% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579
      cylinder 2   0.62103
      cylinder 3   0.71501
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375
      media 203 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4  2 2
    unit   14
      com="edge rod 1.94% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579
      cylinder 2   0.62103
      cylinder 3   0.71501
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375
      media 202 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4  2 2
    unit   17
      com="corner rod 1.69% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579
      cylinder 2   0.62103
      cylinder 3   0.71501
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375
      media 213 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4  2 2

::

  unit   22
      com="interior rod 1.94% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579
      cylinder 2   0.62103
      cylinder 3   0.71501
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375
      media   2 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4  2 2
    unit   23
      com="interior rod 2.93% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579
      cylinder 2   0.62103
      cylinder 3   0.71501
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375
      media   1 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4  2 2
    unit   33
      com="interior gad pin"
      cylinder 1   0.270917524
      cylinder 2   0.383135237
      cylinder 3   0.469242916
      cylinder 4   0.541835048
      cylinder 5   0.60579
      cylinder 6   0.62103
      cylinder 7   0.71501
      cuboid   8 4p0.9375
      media 500 1 1
      media 500 1 2 -1
      media 500 1 3 -2
      media 500 1 4 -3
      media 500 1 5 -4
      media 121 1 6 -5
      media 101 1 7 -6
      media 111 1 8 -7
      boundary    8  2 2
    unit   37
      com="edge rod 2.93% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579
      cylinder 2   0.62103
      cylinder 3   0.71501
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375
      media 201 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4  2 2
    unit   77
     com="corner rod 1.94% enr"
      cylinder 1   0.60579
      cylinder 2   0.62103
      cylinder 3   0.71501
      cuboid   4 4p0.9375
      media 212 1 1
      media 121 1 2 -1
      media 101 1 3 -2
      media 111 1 4 -3
      boundary    4  2 2

::

  global unit 100
     cuboid  1   4p6.70306
     array 1 1  place 4 4  0.0 0.0
     cuboid  2   4p6.90626
     cuboid  10  4p7.62
     media   111 1 1
     media   630 1 2 -1
     media   620 1 10 -2
     boundary 10 32 32
  end geom
  read array
    ara=1 nux=7 nuy=7 typ=cuboidal
    fill
      17  14  37  37  37  14  77
      14  23  33  23  23  23  14
      14  23  23  23  33  23  37
      14  23  23  23  23  23  37
      12  23  33  23  23  33  37
      12  22  23  23  23  23  14
      11  12  12  14  14  14  17 end fill
  end array
  read bounds
    all=refl
  end bounds
  end model
  end

.. _3-1-6-13:

TRITON6 sample problem 1: triton6-1.inp
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sample problem *triton6-1.inp* is an example of KENO-VI-based depletion
for an infinite lattice of cylinders fabricated with particulate TRISO
fuel dispersed in a graphite matrix. This provides an example of the
cross section processing specification of a doubly heterogeneous
(*DOUBLEHET*) media and use of the resultant homogenized media in a
depletion calculation.

::

  ' THIS SAMPLE PROBLEM TEST THE FOLLOWING:
  '  ** t6-depl sequence
  '  ** v7-238 group library
  '  ** centrm cross section processing
  '  ** double-heterogeneous cross section processing option
  '  ** deplete-by-constant power and flux
  '  ** system power normalization
  =t6-depl      parm=centrm
  Test case - infinite cylinder
  v7-238
  read comp
  ' fuel kernel
    u-238  101 0 1.72877e-2 293.6 end
    u-235  101 0 5.92585e-3 293.6 end
    o      101 0 4.64272e-2 293.6 end
    b-10   101 0 1.14694e-7 293.6 end
    b-11   101 0 4.64570e-7 293.6 end
  ' first coating
    c      102 0 5.26449e-2 293.6 end
  ' inner pyro carbon
    c      103 0 9.52621e-2 293.6 end
  ' silicon carbide
    c      104 0 4.77240e-2 293.6 end
    si     104 0 4.77240e-2 293.6 end
  ' outer pyro carbon
    c      105 0 9.52621e-2 293.6 end
  ' graphite matrix
    c      106 0 8.77414e-2 293.6 end
  ' carbon pebble outer coating
    c      107 0 8.77414e-2 293.6 end
    b-10   107 0 9.64977e-9 293.6 end
    b-11   107 0 3.90864e-8 293.6 end
    he-3    108 0 3.71220e-11 293.6 end
    he-4    108 0 2.65156e-5 293.6 end
  end comp

::

  read celldata
    doublehet  right_bdy=white fuelmix=10 end
      gfr=0.025    101
      coatt=0.009  102
      coatt=0.004  103
      coatt=0.0035 104
      coatt=0.004  105
      matrix=106 numpar=15000 end grain
    rod squarepitch right_bdy=white hpitch=3.0 108 fuelr=2.5 cladr=3.0 107 fuelh=365 end
  end celldata
  read depletion
    101 flux 107
  end depletion
  read burndata
    power=30 burn=600 down=30 nlib=1 end
  end burndata
  read model
  read param
    npg=200 gen=350 nsk=100 htm=no
  end param
  read geometry
    global unit 1
      cylinder 1 2.5 99 -99
      cylinder 2 3.0 99 -99
      cuboid   3 4p3.0 99 -99
      media    10    1       1
      media     107    1       2  -1
      media     108    1       3  -2
    boundary     3
  end geometry
  read bounds
    all=mirror
  end bounds
  end data
  end model
  end
