.. _Keno:

Keno: A Monte Carlo Criticality Program
=======================================

*L. M. Petrie, K. B. Bekar, C. Celik, D. F. Hollenbach*,\ :sup:`1` *C. M.*
*Perfetti, S. Goluoglu,*\ :sup:`1` *N. F. Landers,*\ :sup:`1` *M. E. Dunn, B.*
*T. Rearden*

KENO is a three-dimensional (3D) Monte Carlo criticality transport
program developed and maintained for use as part of the SCALE Code
System. It can be used as part of a sequence or as a standalone program.
There are two versions of the code currently supported in SCALE.
KENO V.a is the older of the two. KENO-VI contains all current KENO V.a
features plus a more flexible geometry package known as the SCALE
Generalized Geometry Package. The geometry package in KENO-VI is capable
of modeling any volume that can be constructed using quadratic
equations. In addition, such features as geometry intersections, body
rotations, hexagonal and dodecahedral arrays, and array boundaries have
been included to make the code more flexible.

The simpler geometry features supported by KENO V.a allow for
significantly shorter execution times than KENO-VI, while the additional
geometry features supported in KENO-VI make the code appropriate for
cases where geometry modeling is not possible with KENO V.a. In
particular, KENO-VI allows intersections, body truncations with planes,
and a much wider variety of geometrical bodies. KENO-VI also has the
ability to rotate bodies so that volumes no longer must be positioned
parallel to a major axis. Hexagonal arrays are available in KENO-VI and
dohecahedral arrays enable the code to model pebble bed reactors and
other systems composed of close packed spheres. The use of array
boundaries makes it possible to fill a non-cuboidal volume with an
array, specifying the boundary where a particle leaves and enters the
array.

Except for geometry capabilities, the two versions of KENO share most of
the computational capabilities and the input flexibility specific to
most SCALE modules. They can both operate in multigroup or continuous
energy mode, run as standalone codes, or integrated in computational
sequences such as CSAS, TSUNAMI-3D, or TRITON. Both versions of the code
are continually updated and are written in FORTRAN 90.

Computational capabilities shared by the two versions of KENO include
the determination of k‑effective, neutron lifetime, generation time,
energy-dependent leakages, energy- and region-dependent absorptions,
fissions, the system mean-free-path, the region-dependent
mean-free-path, average neutron energy, flux densities, fission
densities, reaction rate tallies, mesh tallies, source convergence
diagnostics, problem-dependent continuous energy temperature treatments,
parallel calculations, restart capabilities, and many more.

:sup:`1`\ Formerly with Oak Ridge National Laboratory

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Many individuals have contributed significantly to the development of
KENO. Special recognition is given to G. E. Whitesides, former Director
of the Computing Applications Division, who was responsible for the
concept and development of the original KENO code. He has also
contributed significantly to some of the techniques used in both KENO
versions. The late J. T. Thomas offered many ideas that have been
implemented in the code. R. M. Westfall, retired from ORNL, provided
early consultation, encouragement, and benchmarks for validating the
code. The special abilities of J. R. Knight, retired from ORNL,
contributed substantially to debugging early versions of the code. S. W.
D. Hart was instrumental in implementing continuous energy temperature
treatments. W. J. Marshall has provided substantial validation and
quality assurance reviews. Appreciation is expressed to C. V. Parks and
S. M. Bowman for their support of KENO and the KENO3D visualization
tool. The late P. B. Fox provided many of the figures in this document.
D. Ilas, B. J. Marshall, and D. E. Mueller consolidated the previous
KENO V.a and KENO-VI manuals into this present form. The efforts of
L. F. Norris (retired), W. C. Carter (retired), S. J. Poarch, D. J.
Weaver (retired), S. Y. Walker and R. B. Raney in preparing this
document are gratefully acknowledged.

The authors thank the U. S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the DOE
Nuclear Criticality Safety Program for sponsorship of the continuous
energy, source convergence diagnostics, and grid geometry features in
the current version.

Introduction to KENO
--------------------

KENO, a functional module in the SCALE system, is a Monte Carlo
criticality program used to calculate :math:`k_{eff}`, fluxes, reaction rates,
and other data for three-dimensional (3-D) systems. Special features
include multigroup or continuous energy mode, simplified data input, the
ability to specify origins for spherical and cylindrical geometry
regions, a P\ :sub:`n` scattering treatment, and restart capability.

The KENO data input features flexibility in the order of input. The only
restrictions are that the sequence identifier, title, and cross section
library must be entered first. A large portion of the data has been
assigned default values found to be adequate for many
problems. This feature enables the user to run a problem with a minimum
of input data.

In addition to the features listed above, KENO-VI uses the SCALE
Generalized Geometry Package (SGGP), which contains a much larger set of
geometrical bodies, including cuboids, cylinders, spheres, cones,
dodecahedrons, elliptical cylinders, ellipsoids, hoppers,
parallelepipeds, planes, rhomboids, and wedges. The code’s flexibility
is increased by allowing: intersecting geometry regions; hexagonal,
dodecahedral, and cuboidal arrays; bodies and holes rotated to any angle
and translated to any position; and a specified array boundary that
contains only that portion of the array located inside the boundary.
Users should be aware that the added geometry features in KENO‑VI can
result in significantly longer run times than KENO V.a. A KENO-VI
problem that can be modeled in KENO V.a will typically run about four
times as long with KENO-VI as it does with KENO V.a. Therefore KENO-VI
is not a replacement for KENO V.a, but rather an additional version for
more complex geometries that could not be modeled previously.

Blocks of input data are entered in the form

**READ XXXX** *input_data* **END XXXX,**

where **XXXX** is the keyword for the type of data being entered. The
types of data entered include parameters, geometry region data, array
definition data, biasing or weighting data, albedo boundary conditions,
starting distribution information, the cross section mixing table, extra
one-dimensional (1-D) (reaction rate) cross section IDs for special
applications, energy group boundaries for tallying in the continuous
energy mode, a mesh grid for collecting flux moments, and printer plot
information.

A block of data can be omitted unless it is needed or desired for the
problem. Within the blocks of data, most of the input is activated by
using keywords to override default values.

The treatment of the energy variable can be either multigroup or
continuous. Changing the calculation mode from multigroup to continuous
energy or vice versa is established by simply changing the cross section
library used. All available calculated entities in the multigroup mode
can also be calculated in the continuous energy mode. If the calculated
entity is energy or group dependent, it is automatically tallied into
the appropriate group structure in the continuous energy mode.

The KENO V.a geometry input consists of spheres, hemispheres, cylinders,
hemicylinders, and cuboids. Although the origin of the cylinders,
hemicylinders, spheres, and hemispheres is zero by default, they may be
specified to any value that will allow the geometry to fit in the
problem. This feature allows the use of nonconcentric cylindrical and
spherical shapes and provides a great deal of freedom in positioning
them. Another feature that expands the generality of the code is the
ability to place the cut surface of the hemicylinders and hemispheres at
any distance between the radius and the origin.

An additional convenience is the availability of an alternative method
for specifying the array definition unit-location data. This method uses
FIDO-like options for filling the array.

As mentioned above, KENO-VI uses the SGGP, which contains a much more
flexible geometry package than the one in KENO V.a. In KENO-VI, geometry
regions are constructed and processed as sets of quadratic equations. A
set of geometric shapes (including all of those used in KENO V.a plus
others) is available in KENO-VI, as well as the ability to build more
complex geometric shapes using sets of quadratic equations. Unlike
KENO V.a, KENO-VI allows intersections between geometry regions within a
unit, and it provides the ability to specify an array boundary that
intersects the array.

The most flexible KENO V.a geometry features are the
“\ **ARRAY**-of-**ARRAY**\ s” and “\ **HOLE**\ s” capabilities. The
**ARRAY**-of-**ARRAY**\ s option allows the construction of **ARRAY**\ s
from other **ARRAY**\ s. The depth of nesting is limited only by
computer space restrictions. This option greatly simplifies the setup
for **ARRAY**\ s involving different **UNIT**\ s at different spacings.
The **HOLE** option allows a **UNIT** or an **ARRAY** to be placed at
any desired location within a geometry region. The emplaced **UNIT** or
**ARRAY** cannot intersect any geometry region and must be wholly
contained within a region. As many **HOLE**\ s as will snugly fit
without intersecting can be placed in a region. This option is
especially useful for describing shipping casks and reflectors that have
gaps or other geometrical features. Any number of **HOLE**\ s can be
described in a problem, and **HOLE**\ s can be nested to any depth.

The primary difference between the KENO V.a and KENO-VI geometry input
is the methodology used to represent the geometry/material regions in a
unit. KENO-VI uses two geometry records (cards) to describe a region.
The first record, called the GEOMETRY record, contains the geometry
(**shape**) keyword, region boundary definitions, and any geometry
modification data. Using geometry modification data, regions can be
rotated and translated to any angle and position within a unit. The
second record, the **CONTENT** record, contains the **MEDIA** keyword;
the material, **HOLE**, or **ARRAY** ID number; the bias ID number; and
the region definition vector. KENO-VI requires that a **GLOBAL UNIT** be
specified in all problems, including single unit problems.

In addition to the *cuboidal* **ARRAY**\ s available in KENO V.a,
*hexagonal* **ARRAY**\ s and *dodecahedral* **ARRAY**\ s can be directly
constructed in KENO-VI. Also, the ability to specify an **ARRAY**
boundary that intersects the **ARRAY** makes it possible to construct a
lattice in a cylinder using one **ARRAY** in KENO-VI instead of multiple
**ARRAY**\ s and **HOLE**\ s as would be required in KENO V.a.

Anisotropic scattering is treated by using discrete scattering angles.
The angles and associated probabilities are generated in a manner that
preserves the moments of the angular scattering distribution for the
selected group-to-group transfer. These moments can be derived from the
coefficients of a P\ :sub:`n` Legendre polynomial expansion. All moments
through the 2n − 1 moment are preserved for n discrete scattering
angles. A one-to-one correspondence exists such that n Legendre
coefficients yield n moments. The cases of zero and one scattering angle
are treated in a special manner. Even when the user specifies multiple
scattering angles, KENO can recognize that the distribution is
isotropic, and therefore KENO selects from a continuous isotropic
distribution. If the user specifies one scattering angle, the code
selects the scattering angle from a linear function if it is positive
between -1 and +1, and otherwise it performs semicontinuous scattering
by picking scattering angle cosines uniformly over some range between –1
and +1. The probability is zero over the rest of the range.

The KENO restart option is easy to activate. Certain changes can be made
when a problem is restarted, including using a different random sequence
or turning off certain print options such as fluxes or the fissions and
absorptions by region.

KENO can also compute angular fluxes and flux moments in multigroup
calculations, which are required to compute scattering terms for
generation of sensitivity coefficients with the SAMS module or the
TSUNAMI-3D control module. Fluxes can also be accumulated in a Cartesian
mesh that is superimposed over the user-defined geometry in an automated
manner.

KENO can perform Monte Carlo transport calculations concurrently on a
number of computational nodes. By introducing a simple master-slave
approach via MPI, KENO runs different random walks concurrently on the
replicated geometry within the same generation. Fission source and other
tallied quantities are gathered at the end of each generation by the
master process and are then processed either for final edits or
subsequent generations. Code parallel performance is strongly dependent
on the size of the problem simulated and the size of the tallied
quantities.

KENO Data Guide
---------------

KENO may be run stand alone or as part of a SCALE criticality safety or
sensitivity and uncertainty analysis sequence. If KENO is run stand
alone in the multigroup mode, cross section data can be used from an
AMPX [2]_ working format library or from a Monte Carlo format cross
section library. If KENO uses an AMPX working format library, a mixing
table data block must be entered. If a Monte Carlo format library is
used, a mixing table data block is not entered, and the mixtures
specified in the KENO geometry description must be consistent with the
mixtures created on the Monte Carlo format library file.

If KENO is run stand alone in the continuous energy mode, a mixing table
data block must be provided unless the restart option is used.

If KENO is run as part of a SCALE criticality safety or sensitivity and
uncertainty analysis sequence, the mixtures are defined in the CSAS or
TSUNAMI-3D input, and a mixing table data block cannot be entered in
KENO. Furthermore, the mixture numbers used in the KENO geometry
description must correspond to those defined in the composition data
block of the CSAS or TSUNAMI-3D input. To use a cell-weighted mixture in
KENO, the keyword “\ **CELLMIX**\ =,” followed by a unique mixture
number, must be specified in the unit cell data of the CSAS or
TSUNAMI‑3D sequence. Unit cell data are applicable only in the
multigroup mode. The mixture number used in the KENO input is the unique
mixture number immediately following the keyword “\ **CELLMIX**\ =.” A
cell‑weighted mixture is available only in SCALE sequences that use
XSDRN to perform a cell-weighting calculation using a multigroup cross
section library. :numref:`tab8-1-1` through :numref:`tab8-1-14` summarize the KENO
input data blocks. These input data blocks are discussed in detail in
the following sections.

In order to run KENO parallel (standalone execution), the user must
provide a name with the “%” prefix in the input file (=%kenovi). Control
modules like CSAS, TRITON, and TSUNAMI-3D automatically initiate
parallel KENO execution if the user provides the required arguments
while running this code.

.. list-table:: Summary of parameter data.
  :name: tab8-1-1
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/Keno/tab1.png

.. list-table:: Summary of array data.
  :name: tab8-1-2
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/Keno/tab2.png

.. list-table:: Summary of biasing data.
  :name: tab8-1-3
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/Keno/tab3.png

.. list-table:: Summary of boundary condition data.
  :name: tab8-1-4
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/Keno/tab4.svg

.. list-table:: Summary of boundary condition data specific to KENO-VI.
  :name: tab8-1-5
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/Keno/tab5.svg

.. list-table:: Summary of geometry data in KENO V.a.
  :name: tab8-1-6
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/Keno/tab6.svg
  * - .. image:: figs/Keno/tab6cont.svg

.. list-table:: Summary of geometry data in KENO-VI.
  :name: tab8-1-7
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/Keno/tab7.svg

.. list-table:: Summary of mixing table data.
  :name: tab8-1-8
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/Keno/tab8.svg

.. list-table:: Summary of plot data.
  :name: tab8-1-9
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/Keno/tab9.svg

.. list-table:: Summary of starting data.
  :name: tab8-1-10
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/Keno/tab10.svg

.. list-table:: Summary of volume data (KENO-VI).
  :name: tab8-1-11
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/Keno/tab11.svg

.. list-table:: Summary of grid geometry data.
  :name: tab8-1-12
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/Keno/tab12.svg

.. _tab8-1-13:
.. table:: Summary of energy group boundary data.
  :align: center

  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | ENERGY                            | Format: READ ENERGY energy group  |
  |                                   | boundaries END ENERGY             |
  |                                   |                                   |
  |                                   | Enter upper energy boundary for   |
  |                                   | each group in eV. The last entry  |
  |                                   | is the lower energy boundary of   |
  |                                   | the last group. For N groups,     |
  |                                   | there are N+1 entries. Entries    |
  |                                   | must be in descending order and   |
  |                                   | in units of eV.                   |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

.. list-table:: Summary of reaction data.
  :name: tab8-1-14
  :align: center

  * - .. image:: figs/Keno/tab14.svg


Keno input outline
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The data input for KENO is outlined below. Default data for KENO have
been found to be adequate for many problems. These values should be
carefully considered when entering data.

Blocks of input data are entered in the form:

**READ XXXX** *input_data* **END XXXX**

where **XXXX** is the keyword for the type of data being entered. The
keywords that can be used are listed in Table 8.1.15. A minimum of four
characters is required for a keyword, and some keyword names may be as
long as twelve characters (**READ PARAMETER**, **READ GEOMETRY**, etc.).
Keyword inputs are not case sensitive. Data input is activated by
entering the words **READ XXXX** followed by one or more blanks. All
input data pertinent to **XXXX** are then entered. Data for **XXXX** are
terminated by entering **END XXXX** followed by two or more blanks. Note
that multiple **READ GRID** blocks are used if multiple grid definitions
are needed.

.. _tab8-1-15
.. table:: Types of input data.
  :align: center

  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | Type of data                      | First four characters             |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | Parameters                        | PARA or PARM                      |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | Geometry                          | GEOM                              |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | Biasing                           | BIAS                              |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | Boundary conditions               | BOUN or BNDS                      |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | Start                             | STAR or STRT                      |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | Energy                            | ENER                              |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | Array (unit orientation)          | ARRA                              |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | Extra 1-D cross sections          | X1DS                              |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | Cross section mixing table\       | MIXT or MIX                       |
  | :sup:`a`                          |                                   |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | Plot\ :sup:`a`                    | PLOT or PLT or PICT               |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | Volumes                           | VOLU                              |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | Grid geometry                     | GRID                              |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | Reactions                         | REAC                              |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | :sup:`a` MIX and PLT must include |                                   |
  | a trailing blank, which is        |                                   |
  | considered part of the keyword.   |                                   |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Three data records **must** be entered for every problem: first the
SCALE sequence identifier, then the problem title, and then the **END
DATA** to terminate the problem.

(1) KENO is typically run using one of the SCALE CSAS or TSUNAMI
sequences, but it may also be run stand alone using KENO V.a or KENO-VI.
The sequence identifier is specified using one line similar to:

=kenovi

This line may also include additional runtime directives that are
described throughout the SCALE manual. For example:

=kenova parm=check

The following guidance generally assumes the user is running KENO stand
alone. If KENO is to be run using of the other sequences (e.g., CSAS5),
see the appropriate manual section for additional guidance.

(2) **problem title**

   Enter a problem title (limit 80 characters, including blanks; extra
   characters will be discarded). A title **must be entered**.
   See Sect. 8.1.2.3.

(3) **READ PARA** *parameter_data* **END PARA**

   Enter parameter input as needed to describe a problem. If parameter
   data are desired in standalone KENO calculations (i.e., non-CSAS),
   they must immediately follow the problem title. Default values are
   assigned to all parameters. A problem **can** be run without entering
   any parameter data if the default values are acceptable.

   Parameter data must begin with the words **READ PARA**, **READ
   PARM**, or **READ PARAMETER.** Parameter data may be entered in any
   order. If a parameter is entered more than once, the last value is
   used. The words **END PARA** or **END PARM**, or **END PARAMETER**
   terminate the parameter data. See Sect. 8.1.2.3.

(n\ :sub:`1`)...( n\ :sub:`13`) The following data may be entered in any
order. Data not needed to describe the problem may be omitted.

(n\ :sub:`1`) **READ GEOM** *all_geometry_region_data* **END GEOM**

Geometry region data must be entered for every problem that is not a
restart problem. Geometry data must begin with the words **READ GEOM**
or **READ GEOMETRY**. The words **END GEOM** or **END GEOMETRY**
terminate the geometry region data. See Sect. 8.1.2.4.

(n\ :sub:`2`) **READ ARRA** *array_definition_data* **END ARRA**

   Enter array definition data as needed to describe the problem. Array
   definition data define the array size and position units (defined in
   the geometry data) in a 3-D lattice that represents the physical
   problem being analyzed. Array data must begin with the words **READ
   ARRA** or **READ ARRAY** and must terminate with the words **END
   ARRA** or **END ARRAY**. See Sect. 8.1.2.5.

(n\ :sub:`4`) **READ BOUN** *albedo_boundary_conditions* **END BOUN**

   Enter albedo boundary conditions as needed to describe the problem.
   Albedo data must begin with the words **READ BOUN, READ BNDS**,
   **READ BOUND**, or **READ BOUNDS,** and it must terminate with the
   words **END BOUN**, **ENDS BNDS**, **END BOUND**, or **END BOUNDS**.
   See Sect. 8.1.2.6.

(n\ :sub:`3`) **READ BIAS** *biasing_information* **END BIAS**

   The *biasing_information* is used to define the weight given to a
   neutron surviving Russian roulette. Biasing data must begin with the
   words **READ BIAS**. The words **END BIAS** terminate the biasing
   data. See Sect. 8.1.2.7.

(n\ :sub:`5`) **READ STAR** *starting_distribution_information* **END
STAR**

   Enter starting information data for starting the initial source
   neutrons only if a uniform starting distribution is undesirable.
   Start data must begin with the words **READ STAR, READ STRT** or
   **READ START**, and it must terminate with the words **END STAR**,
   **END STRT** or **END START**. See Sect. 8.1.2.8.

(n\ :sub:`6`) **READ ENER** *energy_group_boundaries* **END ENER**

   Enter upper energy boundaries for each neutron energy group to be
   used for tallying in the continuous energy mode. Energy bin data
   begin with the words **READ ENER** or **READ ENERGY** and terminate
   with the words **END ENER** or **END ENERGY**. The last entry is the
   lower energy boundary of the last group. The values must be in
   descending order. This block is only applicable to continuous energy
   KENO calculations. See Sect. 8.1.2.12.

(n\ :sub:`7`) **READ MIXT** *cross_section_mixing_table* **END MIXT**

   Enter a mixing table to define all the mixtures to be used in the
   problem. The mixing table must begin with the words **READ MIXT** or
   **READ MIX** and must end with the words **END MIXT** or **END MIX**.
   Do not enter mixing table data if KENO is being executed as a part of
   a SCALE sequence. See Sect. 8.1.2.10.

(n\ :sub:`8`) **READ X1DS** *extra_1-D_cross_section_IDs* **END X1DS**

   Enter the IDs of any extra 1-D cross sections to be used in the
   problem. These must be available on the mixture cross section
   library. Extra 1-D cross section data must begin with the words
   **READ X1DS** and terminate with the words **END X1DS**. See
   Sect. 8.1.2.9.

(n\ :sub:`9`) **READ PLOT** *plot_data* **END PLOT**

   Enter the data needed to provide a 2-D character or color plot of a
   slice through a specified portion of the 3-D geometrical
   representation of the problem. Plot data must begin with the words
   **READ PLOT**, **READ PLT**, or **READ PICT** and terminate with the
   words **END PLOT**, **END PLT**, or **END PICT**. See Sect. 8.1.2.11.

(n\ :sub:`10`) **READ VOLU** *volume_data* **END VOLU**

   Enter the data needed to specify the volumes of the geometry data.
   Volume data must begin with the words **READ VOLU** or **READ
   VOLUME** and end with the words **END VOLU** or **END VOLUME**. See
   Sect.Volume data.

(n\ :sub:`11`) **READ GRID** *mesh_grid_data* **END GRID**

   Enter the data needed to specify a simple Cartesian grid over either
   the entire problem or part of the problem geometry for tallying
   fluxes, moments, fission sources, etc. Grid data may be entered using
   the keywords **READ GRID**, **READ GRIDGEOM**, or **READ
   GRIDGEOMETRY**, and they are terminated with either **END GRID**,
   **END GRIDGEOM**, or **END GRIDGEOMETRY**. Multiple grids may be
   defined by repeating the **READ GRID** block several times,
   specifying a different mesh grid identification number for each so
   defined grid. See Sect. Grid geometry data for further information.

(n\ :sub:`12`) **READ REAC** *reaction_data* **END REAC**

   Enter the data needed to specify filters for the reaction tally
   calculations. Reaction data must begin with the words **READ REAC**
   and terminate with **END REAC**. This block is only applicable to
   calculations in the continuous energy mode. See Sect.8.1.2.15.

(n\ :sub:`13`) **END DATA must be entered**

   Terminate the data for the problem.

Procedure for data input
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For a standalone KENO problem, the first data records **must** be the
sequence identifier (e.g., =kenovi or =kenova) and the title. The next
block of data **must** be the parameters if they are to be entered. A
problem can be run without entering the parameters, which causes KENO to
use default values for input parameters. The remaining blocks of data
can be entered in any order.

   **BOLD TYPE** specifies keywords. A keyword is used to identify the
   data that follow it. When a keyword is used, it must be entered
   exactly as shown in the data guide. All keywords except those ending
   with an equal sign must be followed by at least one blank.

   *small_italics* correlate data with a program variable name. The
   actual values are entered in place of the program variable name and
   are terminated by a blank or a comma.

   *CAPITAL ITALICS* identify general data items. General data items are
   general classes of data including

   (1) geometry data such as *UNIT INITIALIZATION* and *UNIT NUMBER
   DEFINITION, GEOMETRY REGION DESCRIPTION, GEOMETRY WORD, MIXTURE
   NUMBER, BIAS ID,* and *REGION DIMENSIONS*,

   (2) albedo data such as *FACE CODES* and *ALBEDO NAMES*,

(3) weighting data such as *BIAS ID NUMBERS*, etc.

   Square brackets The square brackets, [ and ], are used to show that
   an entry is optional.

   Broken line The broken line, \|, is used as a logical “or” symbol to
   show that the entries to its left and right are alternatives that
   cannot be used simultaneously.

Title and parameter data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A *title*, a character string, must be entered at the top of the input
file. The syntax is:

*title* a string of characters with a length of up to 80 characters,
including blanks.

The **PARAMETER** block may contain parameter initializations for those
parameters that need to be changed from their default value. The syntax
for the **PARAMETER** block is:

**READ** **PARA**\ [**METER**] *p\ 1 … p\ N* **END**
**PARA**\ [**METER**]

or

**READ** **PARM** *p\ 1 … p\ N* **END** **PARM**

*p\ 1 … p\ N* are *N* (*N* greater than or equal to zero) keyworded
parameters that together make up the *PARAMETER DATA*

The commonly changed parameters are **TME**\ *,* **GEN**\ *,* **NSK**,
and **NPG**. Seldom changed parameters are **NBK**\ *,* **NFB**\ *,*
**XNB**\ *,* **XFB**\ *,* **WTH**\ *,* **WTL**\ *,* **TBA**\ *,*
**BUG**\ *,* **TRK**\ *,* and **LNG**.

The *PARAMETER DATA*, *p\ 1 … p\ N*, consists of one or more of the
parameters described below.

Floating point parameters

  **RND** = *rndnum* input hexadecimal random number, a default value is
  provided.

  **TME** = *tmax* execution time (in minutes) for the problem, default =
  0.0 (no limit).

  **TBA** = *tbtch* time allotted for each generation (in minutes),
  default = 10 minutes. If *tbtch* is exceeded in any generation, the
  problem is assumed to be looping. Execution is terminated, and final
  edits are performed. The problem can loop indefinitely on a computer if
  the system-dependent routine to interrupt the problem (PULL) is not
  functional. **TBA=** is also used to set the amount of time available
  for generating the initial starting points.

  **SIG** = *tsigma* if entered and > 0.0, this is the standard deviation
  at which the problem will terminate, default = 0.0, which means do not
  check sigma.

  **WTA** = *dwtav* the default average weight given a neutron that
  survives Russian roulette, *dwtav* default = 0.5.

  **WTH** = *wthigh* the default value of *wthigh* is 3.0 and should be
  changed only if the user has a valid reason to do so. The weight at
  which splitting occurs is defined to be *wthigh x wtavg*, where *wtavg*
  is the weight given to a neutron that survives Russian roulette.

  **WTL** = *wtlow* Russian roulette is played when the weight of a
  neutron is less than *wtlow x wtavg*. The *wtlow* default =
  1.0/\ *wthigh*.

  .. note:: The default values of *wthigh* and *wtlow* have been determined to minimize the deviation per unit running time for many problems.

  **MSH** = *mesh_size* Length (cm) of one side of a cubic mesh for
  tallying fluxes. Default = 0.0. A positive non-zero value must be
  entered if **MFX**\ =YES and **READ GRID** input is not entered.

  **TTL =** *temperature_tolerance* The continuous energy cross sections
  must be within the *temperature_tolerance* (in degrees Kelvin) of the
  requested temperature for the problem to run. A negative value specifies
  the use of the closest temperature to that requested. TTL is ignored
  when **DBX** is nonzero. The default = -1.0.

  **DBH** = *dbrc_high* the energy cutoff (in eV) up to which the Doppler
  Broadening Rejection Correction (DBRC) method will be used on nuclides
  for which DBRC is enabled, and cross section libraries are available.
  DBH is only used in CE simulations. Default = 210.0 eV.

  **DBL** = *dbrc_low* the energy cutoff (in eV) down to which DBRC will
  be used on nuclides for which DBRC is enabled and cross section
  libraries are available. Only used in CE simulations. Default = 0.4 eV.

Integer parameters

  **GEN** = *nba* number of generations to be run, default = 203.

  **NPG** = *npb* number of neutrons per generation, default = 1000.

  **NSK** = *nskip* number of generations (1 through *nskip*) to be
  omitted when collecting results, default = 3.

  **RES** = *nrstrt* number of generations between writing restart data,
  default = 0. If **RES** is zero, restart data are not written. When
  restarting a problem, **RES** is defaulted to the value that was used
  when the restart data block was written. Thus, it must be entered as
  zero to terminate writing restart data for a restarted problem.

  **NBK** = *nbank* number of positions in the neutron bank, default =
  *npb* + 25.

  **XNB** = *nxnbk* number of extra entries in the neutron bank, default =
  0.

  **NFB** = *nfbnk* number of positions in the fission bank, default =
  *npb.*

  **XFB** = *nxfbk* number of extra entries in the fission bank, default =
  0.

  **X1D** = *numx1d* number of extra 1-D cross sections, default = 0.

  **BEG** = *nbas* beginning generation number, default = 1. If **BEG** is
  greater than 1, restart data must be available. **BEG** must be 1
  greater than the number of generations retrieved from the restart file.

  **NB8** = *nb8* number of blocks allocated for the first direct-access
  unit, default = 1000.

  **NL8** = *nl8* length of blocks allocated for the first direct-access
  unit, default = 512.

  **NQD** = *nquad* quadrature order for angular flux tallies, default =
  0, which means do not collect. Angular fluxes are typically only needed
  for TSUNAMI-3D calculations.

  **NGP** = *ngp* number of neutron energy groups to be used for tallying
  in the continuous energy mode. If *NGP* corresponds to a standard SCALE
  group structure, then the SCALE group structure will be used. If it does
  not correspond to a standard structure, an equally spaced in lethargy
  group structure will be used. If nothing is specified for a continuous
  energy problem, the SCALE 238 group structure will be used.

  **PNM** = *isctr* highest order of flux moment tallies, default = 0.
  Flux moments are typically only tallied for TSUNAMI-3D calculations.

  **CET** = *ce_tsunami_mode*.
  mode for CE TSUNAMI (See TSUNAMI-3D manual).

      0 = No sensitivity calculations

      1 = CLUTCH sensitivity calculation

      2 = IFP sensitivity calculation

      4 = GEAR-MC calculation (with CLUTCH only)

      5 = GEAR-MC calculation (with CLUTCH+IFP)

      7 = Undersampling metric calculation

  **CFP** = *number_of_latent_generations*

   number of latent generations used for IFP sensitivity or
   :math:`F^{*}\left( r \right)` calculations. Note:

   - If CET=1 and CFP= -1 then :math:`F^{*}\left( r \right)` is assumed to
     equal one everywhere.

   - If CET=4 and CFP= -1 then :math:`F^{*}\left( r \right)` is assumed to
     equal zero everywhere.


  **DBR** = *lusedbrc* use Doppler Broadening Rejection Correction method.
  See Sect. 8.1.6.2.9 for more details. Only used in CE simulations.
  Default = 2.

     0 = No DBRC

     1 = DBRC for :sup:`238`\ U only

     2 = DBRC for all available nuclides (:sup:`232`\ Th, :sup:`234`\ U,
     :sup:`235`\ U, :sup:`236`\ U, :sup:`238`\ U, :sup:`237`\ Np,
     :sup:`239`\ Pu, :sup:`240`\ Pu)

  **DBX** = *db_xs_mode*

  option for performing problem-dependent or on-the-fly Doppler
  Broadening. See Sect. 8.1.6.2.10 for more details. Default = 2.

     0 = No problem-dependent or on-the-fly Doppler Broadening

     1 = Perform problem-dependent Doppler Broadening for 1D cross
     sections only.

     2 = Perform problem-dependent Doppler Broadening for both 1D and 2D
     (thermal scattering data) cross sections.

Alphanumeric parameter data

  **CEP** = *lcep* key for choosing the calculation mode in stand alone
  KENO calculations. The parameter is set to the appropriate value by the
  calling sequence if not stand alone KENO. For stand alone KENO, enter NO
  for multigroup mode, or enter the continuous energy directory filename
  for the continuous energy mode. The directory file is the file
  containing pointers to files significant for the continuous energy run.

  **FNI** = *mode_in* extra field in the input restart file name
  [restart\_*mode_in*.keno_input] and
  [restart\_*mode_in*.keno_calculated]. The default is an empty field.

  **FNO** = *mode_out* extra field in the output restart filename
  [restart\_*mode_out*.keno_input] and
  [restart\_*mode_out*.keno_calculated]. The default is an empty field.

Logical parameter data … enter *YES* or *NO*

  **APP** = *lappend* key for appending the restart data, default = NO.

  **FLX** = *nflx* key for collecting and printing fluxes, default = NO.

  **FDN** = *nfden* key for collecting and printing fission densities,
  default = YES.

  **ADJ** = *nadj* key for running adjoint calculation, default = NO.
  Adjoint cross sections must be available to run an adjoint problem. If
  LIB= is specified, the cross sections will be adjointed by the code. If
  XSC= is specified, the cross sections must already be in adjoint order.

  **PTB** = *ptb* key for using probability tables in the continuous
  energy mode, default = YES

  **PNU =** *lpromptnu* key for using delayed or prompt ν in the
  continuous energy mode, default = NO – use total.

  **FRE** = *lfree_analytic* key for using free analytic gas treatment,
  default = YES.

  **AMX** = *amx* key for printing all mixture cross section data. This is
  the same as activating *XAP, XS1, XS2, PKI*, and *P1D*. If any of these
  are entered in addition to *AMX*, that portion of *AMX* will be
  overridden, default = NO.

  **XAP** = *prtap* key for printing discrete scattering angles and
  probabilities for the mixture cross sections, default = NO.

  **XS1** = *prtp0* key for printing mixture 1-D cross sections, default =
  NO.

  **XS2** = *prt1* key for printing mixture 2-D cross sections, default =
  NO.

  **XSL** = *prtl* key for printing mixture 2-D P\ :sub:`L` cross
  sections, default = NO. The Legendre expansion order L is automatically
  read from the cross section library.

  **PKI** = *prtchi* print input fission spectrum, default = NO.

  **P1D** = *prtex* print extra 1-D cross sections, default = NO.

  **FAR** = *lfa* key for generating region-dependent fissions and
  absorptions for each energy group, default = NO.

  **GAS** = *lgas* key for printing region-dependent fissions and
  absorptions by energy group, applicable only if FAR = YES. Default =
  FAR. GAS = YES prints region-dependent data by energy group. GAS = NO
  suppresses region-dependent data by energy group.

  **MKP** = *larpos* calculate and print matrix k-effective by unit
  location, default = NO. Unit location may also be referred to as array
  position or position index.

  **CKP** = *lckp* calculate and print cofactor k-effective by unit
  location, default = NO. Unit location may also be referred to as array
  position or position index.

  **FMP** = *pmapos* print fission production matrix by array position,
  default = NO.

  **MKU** = *lunit* calculate and print matrix k-effective by unit type,
  default = NO.

  **CKU** = *lcku* calculate and print cofactor k-effective by unit type,
  default = NO.

  **FMU** = *pmunit* print fission production matrix by unit type, default
  = NO.

  **MKH** = *lmhole* calculate and print matrix k-effective by hole
  number, default = NO.

  **CKH** = *lckh* calculate and print cofactor k-effective by hole
  number, default = NO.

  **FMH** = *pmhole* print fission production matrix by hole number,
  default = NO.

  **HHL** = *lhhgh* collect matrix information by hole number at the
  highest hole nesting level, default = NO.

  **MKA** = *lmarry* calculate and print matrix k-effective by array
  number, default = NO.

  **CKA** = *lcka* calculate and print cofactor k-effective by array
  number, default = NO.

  **FMA** = *pmarry* print fission production matrix by array number,
  default = NO.

  **HAL** = *langh* collect matrix information by array number at the
  highest array nesting level, default = NO.

  **BUG** = *ldbug* print debug information, default = NO. Enter *YES* for
  code debug purposes only.

  **TRK** = *ltrk* print tracking information, default = NO. Enter *YES*
  for code debug purposes only.

  **PWT** = *lpwt* print weight average array, default = NO.

  **PGM** = *lgeom* print unprocessed geometry as it is read, default =
  NO.

  **SMU** = *lmult* calculate the average self-multiplication of a unit,
  default = NO.

  **NUB** = *nubar* calculate the average number of neutrons per fission
  and the average energy group at which fission occurred, default = YES.

  **PAX** = *lcorsp* print the arrays defining the correspondence between
  the cross section energy group structure and the albedo energy group
  structure, default = NO.

  **TFM** = *ltfm* perform coordinate transform for flux moments and
  angular flux calculations, default = NO.

  **PMF** = *prtmore* print angular fluxes or flux moments if calculated,
  default = NO.

  **CFX** = *nflx* collect fluxes, default = NO.

  **UUM** = *lUnionizedMix* use unionized mixture cross section,
  default=NO. Only used in CE simulations. See Sect. 8.1.6.2.3 for further
  details.

  **M2U =** *luseMap2Union* store cross sections for each nuclide on a
  unionized energy grid, default=NO. Only used in CE simulations. See
  Sect. 8.1.6.2.3 for further details.

  **SCX** = *lxsecSave* save CE cross sections to restart file,
  default=NO.

  **MFX** = *make_mesh_flux* compute mesh fluxes on intervals defined by
  **MSH** above or by READ GRID data block, default = NO.

  **PMS** = *print_mesh_flux* print mesh fluxes if computed, default = NO.

  **MFP** = *mean-free-path* compute and print the mean-free-path of a
  neutron by region, default = NO.

  **HTM** = *html_output* produce HTML formatted output for interactive
  browsing, sorting, and plotting of results, default = YES.

  **PMM** = *print_mesh_moments* print the angular moments of the mesh
  flux, if computed, default = NO.

  **PMV** = *print_mesh_volumes* print the volume of each mesh interval,
  if computed. Default = NO.

  **FST** = *lprint_FStar* Create a .3dmap file that contains the
  *F*\ :sup:`\*`\ (r) mesh used by a CE-TSUNAMI CLUTCH sensitivity
  calculation.

  **RUN** = *lrun* key for determining if the problem is to be executed
  when data checking is complete, default = YES.

  **PLT** = *lplot* key for drawing specified plots of the problem
  geometry, default = YES.

.. note:: The parameters RUN and PLOT can also be entered in the PLOT
  data. See Sect. 8.1.2.11. It is recommended that these parameters be
  entered only in the parameter data in order to ensure that the data
  printed in the Logical Parameters table is actually performed. If RUN
  and/or PLT are entered in both the parameter data and plot data, the
  results vary depending on whether the problem is run (1) stand alone,
  (2) as a restarted problem, (3) as CSAS with parm=check, or (4) as CSAS
  without parm=check. These conditions are detailed below.

KENO standalone and CSAS with PARM=CHECK
  The values of RUN and/or PLT entered in KENO parameter data are printed in the Logical Parameters table of the problem output. However, values for RUN and/or PLT entered in the **KENO plot data** will override the values entered in the parameter data.

Restarted KENO
  The values of RUN and/or PLT printed in the Logical Parameters table of the problem output are the final values from the parent problem unless those values are overridden by values entered in the **KENO parameter data** of the restarted problem. If the problem is restarted at generation 1, **KENO plot data** can be entered, and the values for RUN and/or PLT will override the values printed in the Logical Parameters table.

CSAS Without PARM=CHECK
  The values of RUN and/or PLT entered in the KENO parameter data override values entered in the KENO plot data. The values printed in the Logical Parameters table control whether the problem is to be executed and whether a plot is performed.

Parameters that are either Integer or Logical

**SCD**\ = *lScnvgDiag* enable fission source convergence diagnostics
(ScnvgDiag), default=YES. See Sect. 8.1.6.7for further details.

**CDS** = *lcadis/lGridFissions* accumulate neutron fissions to use as
fission source in subsequent MAVRIC/Monaco shielding calculation or for
visualization, default = NO

**GFX** = *lGridFlux* compute grid fluxes averaged over the volume of
the mesh on intervals defined by a READ GRID data block, default = NO.

**MFX** = *lMeshFlux* compute mesh fluxes averaged over the volume of
mixtures/materials in a mesh on intervals defined by **MSH** above or by
READ GRID data block, default = NO.

**CGD** = *lStarMesh* grid ID for the *F*\ :sup:`\*`\ (r) mesh for
continuous energy CLUTCH sensitivity calculations. This mesh is defined
in the **READ GRID** data block, default = NO.

.. note::  The KENO codes in previous SCALE versions allowed for only one
  mesh definition in the user input with either MSH parameter or **READ
  GRID** data block, and (2) calculation of a single mesh-based quantity,
  such as **MFX** (mesh fluxes) or **CDS** (fission source accumulation on
  a mesh), per KENO simulation.

  The option to define multiple spatial meshes during a single simulation
  has been implemented in the KENO codes to add flexibility to mesh-based
  quantity calculations. The new implementation requires that each mesh
  definition in the **READ GRID** block should have a unique NUMBER (grid
  ID), which is used for mesh assignment. Users can assign any number of
  mesh-based quantities by setting the mesh parameters **SCD**, **CDS**,
  **GFX**, **MFX** and **CGD** to this grid NUMBER.

  To support these former and new definition formats, the parameters
  **SCD**, **CDS**, **GFX**, **MFX** and **CGD** have been redesigned to
  allow either integer or logical entries. Integer entries are required if
  multiple mesh-based quantities are requested by the user. In this case,
  each integer entry must point to a grid ID specified in any **READ
  GRID** data block. See Sect. 8.1.2.14. for several examples for the use
  of these parameter definitions. These entries are detailed below.

   **SCD**\ =yes Enable source convergence diagnostics using the fission
   source accumulation on the default mesh, which is 5 × 5 × 5 Cartesian
   mesh overlaying the whole problem geometry, generated automatically.
   See Sect. 8.1.6.7.

   **SCD**\ =\ *id* Enable source convergence diagnostics using the
   fission source accumulation on the mesh defined with **READ GRID**
   data block with grid ID, *id*.

   **MFX**\ =yes Compute mesh fluxes (fluxes averaged over each region
   volume in a voxel) on intervals defined by **MSH** above or by the
   first specified **READ GRID** data block.

   **MFX**\ =\ *id* Compute mesh fluxes on intervals defined by the
   **READ GRID** data block with grid ID, *id*.

   **CDS**\ =yes Accumulate fission sources on intervals defined by the
   first specified **READ GRID** data block.

   **CDS**\ =\ *id* Accumulate fission source on intervals defined by
   the specified **READ GRID** data block with grid ID, *id*.

   **GFX**\ =\ *id* Compute grid fluxes (fluxes averaged over a voxel
   volume) on intervals defined by the READ GRID data block with grid
   ID, *id*.

   **CGD**\ =\ *id* Enable a mesh grid defined by the READ GRID data
   block with grid ID, id for CLUTCH :math:`F^{*}\left( r \right)`
   calculations.

   All of the above quantities may be requested in a single input using
   either the same or different grids. See Sect. 8.1.2.14 for further
   details.

I/O Unit Numbers

  **XSC** = *xsecs* I/O unit number for a Monte Carlo format mixed cross
  section library. When LIB≠0, default = 14. To read a mixed cross section
  library from a Monte Carlo format library file or CSASI, XSC must be
  specified.

  **ALB** = *albdo* I/O unit number for albedo data, default = 79.

  **WTS** = *wts* I/O unit number for weights, default = 80.

  **LIB** = *lib* I/O unit number for *AMPX* working format cross section
  library, default = 0.

  **SKT** = *skrt* I/O unit number for scratch space, default = 16.

  **RST** = *rstrt* I/O unit number for reading restart data, default = 0.

  Enter a logical unit number to restart if *BEG* > 1.

  **WRS** = *wstrt* I/O unit number for writing restart data, default = 0.

     A non-zero value must be entered if *RES* > 0.

  **GRP** = *grpbs* I/O unit number for an energy group boundary library,
  default = 77.

  Example: **READ PARAM** **NPG**\ =203 **FLX**\ =YES **END PARAM**

.. _8-1-2-4:

Geometry data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The *GEOMETRY\_ DATA* consists of a series of **UNIT** descriptions, one
of which may be the **GLOBAL UNIT**. The **UNIT** is the basic geometry
piece in KENO and often corresponds to a well-defined physical entity
(e.g., a fuel pin). A **UNIT**, therefore, may consist of multiple
*material regions*. Each **UNIT** has its own, local coordinate system.
The **UNIT**\ s are assembled to construct the problem’s global geometry
for KENO. The *GEOMETRY\_ DATA* must be entered unless the problem is
being restarted. See :ref:`8-1-3-6` for detailed examples.

UNITS
^^^^^

Geometric arrangements in KENO are achieved in a manner similar to using
a child’s building blocks. Each building block is called a **UNIT**. An
**ARRAY** or lattice is constructed by stacking these **UNIT**\ s. Once
an **ARRAY** or lattice has been constructed, it can be placed in a
**UNIT** by using an **ARRAY** specification.

Each **UNIT** in an **ARRAY** or lattice has its own coordinate system.
In KENO V.a, all coordinate systems in all **UNIT**\ s must have the
same orientation. This restriction is removed in KENO-VI. All geometry
data used in a problem are correlated to the absolute coordinate system
by specifying a **GLOBAL UNIT**. **UNIT**\ s are constructed of
combinations from several allowed **shape**\ s or geometric regions.
These regions can be placed anywhere within a **UNIT**. In KENO V.a the
regions are oriented along the coordinate system of the **UNIT** and do
not intersect other regions. This means, for example, that a
**CYLINDER** must have its axis parallel to one of the coordinate axes,
while a rectangular parallelepiped must have its faces perpendicular to
a coordinate axis. The most stringent KENO V.a geometry restriction is
that none of the options allow geometry regions to intersect. In KENO
V.a, each region in a unit must entirely contain each preceding region.
The orientation, intersection, and containment restrictions are
eliminated in KENO-VI. :numref:`fig8-1-1` shows some situations that are not
allowed in KENO V.a, but are allowed in KENO-VI.

.. _fig8-1-1:
.. figure:: figs/Keno/fig1.png
  :align: center

  Examples of geometry allowed in KENO-VI but not allowed in KENO V.a.

For KENO V.a, unless special options are invoked, each geometric region
in a **UNIT** must completely enclose each interior region. Regions may
touch at points of tangency and may share faces. See :numref:`fig8-1-2` for
examples of allowable situations.

.. _fig8-1-2:
.. figure:: figs/Keno/fig2.png
  :align: center

  Examples of correct KENO V.a units.

Special options are provided to circumvent the complete enclosure
restriction in KENO V.a or to enhance the basic geometry package in
KENO-VI. These options include **ARRAY** and **HOLE** descriptions. The
**HOLE** option is the simplest of these and allows placing a **UNIT**
anywhere within a region of another **UNIT.** In KENO V.a, **HOLE**\ s
are not allowed to intersect the region into which they are placed; this
restriction does not apply in KENO-VI (see :numref:`fig8-1-3`). In both geometry
packages, a **HOLE** cannot intersect the **UNIT** boundary. It is
recommended that the outer boundary of a **UNIT** used as a **HOLE**
should not be tangent to or share a boundary with another **HOLE** or a
region of the **UNIT** containing the **HOLE** because the code may find
that the regions are intersecting due to precision and round-off. Since
a particle must check every region to determine its location within a
**UNIT**, using **HOLE**\ s to contain complex sections of a problem may
decrease the CPU time needed for the problem in KENO-VI. Inclusion of
**HOLE**\ s increases run-time in KENO V.a, but in many cases cannot be
avoided. An arbitrary number of **HOLE**\ s can be placed in a region in
combination with a series of surrounding regions. The only restrictions
on **HOLE**\ s are (1) when they are placed in a **UNIT,** they must be
entirely contained within the **UNIT**, and (2) they cannot intersect
other **HOLE**\ s or nested **ARRAY**\ s. **HOLE**\ s in KENO V.a cannot
intersect an **ARRAY**; in KENO-VI, the **HOLE** cannot intersect the
**ARRAY** boundary.

.. _fig8-1-3:
.. figure:: figs/Keno/fig3.png
  :align: center

  Example demonstrating HOLE capability in KENO.

Lattices or arrays are created by stacking **UNIT**\ s. In KENO V.a,
only rectangular parallelepipeds can be organized in an **ARRAY**.
**HEXPRISM**\ s and **DODECAHEDRON**\ s are allowed in KENO-VI to
construct triangular pitched or closed-packed dodecahedral **ARRAY**\ s,
respectively. The adjacent faces of adjacent **UNIT**\ s stacked in this
manner must match exactly. See :ref:`8-1-3-6-4` for additional
clarification and :numref:`fig8-1-4` and :numref:`fig8-1-5` for typical examples.

.. _fig8-1-4:
.. figure:: figs/Keno/fig4.png
  :align: center
  :width: 400

  Example of triangular pitched ARRAY construction.

.. _fig8-1-5:
.. figure:: figs/Keno/fig5.png
  :align: center

  Example of ARRAY construction.

The **ARRAY** option is provided to allow for placing an **ARRAY** or
lattice within a **UNIT**. In KENO-VI, an **ARRAY** is placed in a
**UNIT** by inserting it directly into a geometry/material region as a
content record. In KENO V.a, the **ARRAY** is placed directly in the
unit like a **CUBOID**: it must be the first region in the **UNIT**, or
the **ARRAY** elements must intersect with the smaller region.
Subsequent regions in the **UNIT** containing the **ARRAY** must contain
it entirely. In KENO-VI, the reverse is true: the region boundary
containing the **ARRAY** must coincide with or be contained within the
**ARRAY** boundary. Therefore, in KENO-VI the region boundary becomes
the **ARRAY** boundary, with the problem ignoring any part of the
**ARRAY** outside the boundary. A particle enters or leaves the
**ARRAY** when the region boundary is crossed. In KENO V.a, only one
**ARRAY** can be placed directly in a UNIT. However, multiple
**ARRAY**\ s can be placed within a **UNIT** by using **HOLE**\ s. When
an **ARRAY** is placed in a **UNIT** via a **HOLE**, the **UNIT** that
contains the **ARRAY** (rather than the **ARRAY** itself) is placed in
the **UNIT**. **ARRAY**\ s of dissimilar **ARRAY**\ s can be created by
stacking **UNIT**\ s that contain **ARRAY**\ s. In KENO-VI, it is
possible to place multiple **ARRAY**\ s in a **UNIT** by placing them in
separate regions. Also in KENO-VI, using **HOLE**\ s to insert
**ARRAY**\ s allows the **ARRAY**\ s to be rotated when placed. See
:numref:`fig8-1-6` for an example of an **ARRAY** composed of **UNIT**\ s
containing **HOLE**\ s and **ARRAY**\ s.

.. _fig8-1-6:
.. figure:: figs/Keno/fig6.png
  :align: center

  Example of an ARRAY composed of UNITs containing ARRAYs and HOLEs.

The method of entering *GEOMETRY_DATA* in the geometry data block
follows:

**READ GEOM** *GEOMETRY\_ DATA* **END GEOM**

UNIT initialization
...................

The description of a **UNIT** starts out with the **UNIT**
*INITIALIZATION* and is terminated by encountering another **UNIT**
*INITIALIZATION* or **END GEOM**.

The **UNIT** *INITIALIZATION* has the following format:

[**GLOBAL**] **UNIT** *u*

*u* is the identification number (positive integer) assigned to the
particular **UNIT**. It may be used later to reference a **UNIT**
previously constructed that the user wishes to place in a **HOLE**, or
it may be used in an **ARRAY** (see below for more details).

**GLOBAL** is an attribute that specifies that the respective **UNIT**
is the most comprehensive **UNIT** in the KENO problem to be solved, the
**UNIT** that includes all the other **UNIT**\ s and defines the overall
geometric boundaries of the problem. In general, a \ **GLOBAL UNIT**
must be entered for each problem.

   In KENO V.a, the **GLOBAL** specification is optional. If it is used,
   it can precede either a **UNIT** command or an **ARRAY**
   *PLACEMENT_DESCRIPTION*. If it is not entered and the problem does
   not contain **ARRAY** data, **UNIT** 1 is the default **GLOBAL
   UNIT**. If there is no **GLOBAL UNIT** specified and **UNIT** 1 is
   absent from the geometry description, an error message is printed. If
   the geometry description contains an **ARRAY**, KENO V.a defaults the
   global array to the array referenced by the last **ARRAY**
   *PLACEMENT_DESCRIPTION* that is not immediately preceded by a unit
   description. Otherwise, it is the largest array number specified in
   the array data (:ref:`8-1-2-5`).

Examples of initiating a **UNIT**:

1. Initiate input data for **UNIT** No. 6.

..

   **UNIT** 6

2. Initiate input data for the **GLOBAL UNIT** which is **UNIT** No. 4.

..

   **GLOBAL UNIT** 4

For each **UNIT**, the **UNIT**\ ’s *DESCRIPTION* follows the
**UNIT**\ ’s *INITIALIZATION*. The *DESCRIPTION* is realized by
combining the commands listed below. The basic principles for
constructing a **UNIT** are different between KENO V.a and KENO-VI. A
brief discussion of these principles, together with a few examples, is
presented at the end of this section following the description of the
basic input used to build the geometry of a **UNIT**. The keywords that
may be used to define a **UNIT** in KENO are as follows:

**shape**

**COM=**

**HOLE**

**ARRAY**

**REPLICATE** (KENO V.a only)

**REFLECTOR** (KENO V.a only)

**MEDIA** (KENO-VI only)

**BOUNDARY** (KENO-VI only)

Shape
.....

**Shape** is a generic keyword used to describe a basic geometric shape
that may be used in building the geometry of a particular **UNIT**. The
general format varies between KENO V.a and KENO-VI. In KENO V.a, the
**shape** defines a region containing a material, so the user is
required to provide both a material and a *bias ID*. In KENO-VI the
**shape** is used strictly as a surface, which is later used to define
the mono-material regions (using the **MEDIA** card). The user is
therefore required to enter a label for this surface so that the
**shape** can be referenced later.

KENO V.a:

**shape** *m* *b* *d*\ :sub:`1` … *d*\ :sub:`N` [*a*\ :sub:`1` …* [*a*\ :sub:`M` ]…]

KENO-VI:

**shape** *l* *d*\ :sub:`1` … *d*\ :sub:`N` [*a*\ :sub:`1` …* [*a*\ :sub:`M` ]…]

**shape** is a generic keyword that describes a basic predefined KENO
shape (e.g., **CUBOID**, **CYLINDER**) that is used to build the
geometry of the **UNIT**. The predefined shapes differ between KENO V.a
and KENO-VI. See Appendix A for a description of the KENO V.a basic
shapes and Appendix B for the KENO-VI shapes.

*m* is the mixture number of the material (positive integer) that fills
the particular shape in KENO V.a **UNIT** description. A material number
of zero indicates a void region (i.e., no material is present in the
volume defined by the **shape**).

*b* is the bias identification number (*bias ID*, a positive integer)
assigned to the particular region defined by the **shape** in the KENO
V.a **UNIT** description.

*l* is the label (positive integer) assigned to the particular **shape**
in the KENO-VI **UNIT** description. This label is used later to define
a certain mono-material region within the **UNIT**.

*d*\ :sub:`1` … *d*\ :sub:`N` represent the *N* dimensions (floating point numbers) that
define the particular **shape** (e.g., radius of a sphere or cylinder).
See Appendixes A and B for the particular value of *N* and how each
**shape** is described.

*a*\ :sub:`1` … *a*\ :sub:`M` are *M* optional *ATTRIBUTES* for the **shape**. The
attributes provide additional flexibility in the **shape** description.
The attributes that may be used with either KENO V.a or KENO-VI are
described below (see shape ATTRIBUTES).

shape ATTRIBUTES

The *ATTRIBUTES* that can be used to enhance the **shape** description
are **CHORD**, **ORIG**\ [**IN**], **CENTER**, and **ROTATE** (KENO-VI
only).

The CHORD attribute

This attribute has different formats in KENO V.a and KENO-VI. The user
will notice that it is more restrictive in KENO V.a. Only the
**HEMISPHERE and HEMICYLINDER shape**\ s can be **CHORD**\ ed in KENO
V.a, but all 3-D shapes may be **CHORD**\ ed in KENO-VI.

KENO V.a:
**CHORD** *ρ*

KENO-VI:
**CHORD** [**+X**\ =\ *x\ +*] [-**X**\ =\ *x\ -*] [**+Y**\ =\ *y\ +*]
[-**Y**\ =\ *y\ -*] [**+Z**\ =\ *z\ +*] [-**Z**\ =\ *z\ -*]

:math:`p`
  is the distance *ρ* from the cut surface to the center of the sphere
  or the axis of a hemicylinder. See :numref:`fig8-1-7` and :numref:`fig8-1-8`. Negative
  values of *ρ* indicate that less than half of the **shape** is retained,
  while positive values indicate that more than half of the **shape** will
  be retained.

**+X=**, -**X=**, **+Y=**, -**Y=**, **+Z=**, -**Z=**
  are subordinate
  keywords that define the axis parallel to the chord. The “+” and “-”
  signs are used to define the side of the chord which is included in the
  volume. A “+” in the keyword indicates that the more positive side of
  the chord is included in the volume. A “-” in the keyword indicates that
  the more negative side of the chord is included in the volume.

*x\ +, x\ -, y\ +, y\ -, z\ +, z\ -*
  are the coordinates of the plane
  perpendicular to the chord. For each chord added to a body, the keyword
  **CHORD** must be used, followed by one of the subordinate keywords and
  its dimension.

In KENO V.a, the CHORD attribute is applicable for only hemispherical
and hemicylindrical shapes, *not* for SPHERE, XCYLINDER, YCYLINDER,
CYLINDER, ZCYLINDER, CUBE, or CUBOID.

.. _fig8-1-7:
.. figure:: figs/Keno/fig7.png
  :align: center

  Partial hemisphere or hemicylinder; less than half exists (less than half is defined by ρ < 0).

.. _fig8-1-8:
.. figure:: figs/Keno/fig8.png
  :align: center

  Partial hemisphere of hemicylinder; more than half exists (more than half is defined by ρ > 0).

:numref:`fig8-1-9` provides two examples of the use of the CHORD option in
KENO-VI.

.. _fig8-1-9:
.. figure:: figs/Keno/fig9.png
  :align: center

  Examples of the CHORD option in KENO-VI.

The ORIG\ [IN] attribute

The format is slightly different between KENO V.a and KENO-VI. Since the
entries in KENO-VI are key worded, the user has more flexibility in
choosing the order of these entries or in using default values. Only
non-zero values must be entered in KENO-VI, but all applicable values,
whether zero or non-zero, must be entered in KENO V.a.

KENO V.a:
**ORIG**\ [**IN**] *a b* [*c*]

KENO-VI:
**ORIGIN** [**X**\ =\ *x*\ :sub:`0`] [**Y**\ =\ *y*\ :sub:`0`] [**Z**\ =\ *z*\ :sub:`0`]

:math:`a`
  is the X coordinate of the origin of a sphere or hemisphere; the X
  coordinate of the centerline of a Z or Y cylinder or hemicylinder; the Y
  coordinate of the centerline of an X cylinder or hemicylinder.

:math:`b`
  is the Y coordinate of the origin of a sphere or hemisphere; the Y
  coordinate of the centerline of a Z cylinder or hemicylinder; the Z
  coordinate of the centerline of an X or Y cylinder or hemicylinder.

:math:`c`
  is the Z coordinate of the origin of a sphere or hemisphere; it must
  be omitted for all cylinders or hemicylinders.

**X=**, **Y=**, **Z=**
  are the subordinate keywords used to define the
  new position of the origin of the **shape**. If the a subordinate
  keyword appears more than once after the **ORIGIN** keyword, the values
  are summed. If the new value is zero, the particular coordinate does not
  need to be specified.

*x*\ :sub:`0`, *y*\ :sub:`0`, *z*\ :sub:`0`
  are the values for the new coordinates where the
  origin of the **shape** is to be translated.

The CENTER attribute

This attribute establishes the reference center for the flux moment
calculations, which can be useful in TSUNAMI calculations. The syntax
for this attribute is:

**CENTER** *center_type* [*u*] [*x y z*]

*center_type*
  is the reference center value, as described in
  :numref:`tab8-1-16`. The default value is **global**.

*u*
  is the **UNIT** number to be used as a reference center for this
  region when the *center_type* is **unit**.

*x*, *y*, *z*
  are the offset from the point specified by the
  *center_type*. The default is 0.0 for all three entries.

.. _tab8-1-16:
.. table:: Reference center values
  :align: center

  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | **center_type**                   | **Reference point**               |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | **unit**                          | Reference is defined as the       |
  |                                   | origin of **UNIT** *unit_number*  |
  |                                   | plus the offset defined by        |
  |                                   | *x*, \ *y*, and *z*.              |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  |  **global**                       | Reference is defined as system    |
  |                                   | origin—i.e., (0,0,0) point of the |
  |                                   | **GLOBAL UNIT**—plus the offset   |
  |                                   | defined by *x*, *y*, and *z*.     |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | **local**                         | Reference is defined as the       |
  |                                   | origin of the current **UNIT**    |
  |                                   | plus the offset defined by *x*,   |
  |                                   | *y*, and *z*.                     |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | **fuelcenter**                    | Reference is defined as the       |
  |                                   | center of all fissile material in |
  |                                   | the system plus the offset        |
  |                                   | defined by *x*, *y*, and *z*.     |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
  | **wholeunit**                     | When entered for the first region |
  |                                   | in a unit, the reference for all  |
  |                                   | regions in the unit are defined   |
  |                                   | as the origin of the current unit |
  |                                   | plus the offset defined by        |
  |                                   | *x*, \ *y*, and *z*.              |
  +-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
